Title: 2606.11598v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.11598v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 00:26:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
> 1

Large language models selectively converge with human -shared neural semantic 

representation s

Chen Hong 1,2 , Ximing Shao 1,2 , Gangyi Feng 1,2* 

1. Department of Linguistics and Modern Languages, The Chinese University of 

Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China 

2. Brain and Mind Institute, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, 

China. 

* Corresponding author 

Gangyi Feng 

Brain and Mind Institute 

Department of Linguistics and Modern Languages 

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. 

Email: g.feng@cuhk.edu.hk 

Funding 

The work described in this paper was supported by grants from the National Natural 

Science Foundation of China (Project No. 32322090 to Gangyi Feng) and the Research 

Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project Nos. 

14614221, 14612923, 14621424, and C4001 -23Y F to Gangyi Feng). 2

Abstract 

Interpersonal communication requires building shared semantics that enable listeners 

to understand speakers’ meanings from their unfolding language, but the dimensional 

structure of this shared neural representation remains unclear. Large language models 

(LLMs) increasingly approximate human language capability and neural responses, 

raising the question of whether they capture the same semantic structure shared between 

human brains. Here, we combined storytelling -listening pseudo -hyperscanning 

magnetoencephalography (MEG) with dimension -resolved interbrain encoding 

modeling to compare human - and LLM -derived accounts of shared neural semantic 

representations . Content words from the speaker’s narratives were rated by human s and 

five recent LLMs along ten semantic dimensions (i.e., perception, motor, space, time, 

socialness, animacy, emotion, attention, causality , and drive ). We tested whether these 

dimensions explained speaker -listener neural synchronization beyond acoustic and 

phonological features. Both human - and LLM -derived semantic spaces explained 

neural synchronization, but these shared semantics are better characterized as a 

multidimensional neural structure rather than a single global signal. These patterns also 

predicted individual differences in listeners’ story comprehension, linking neural 

alignment to behavioral understanding. However, comparable overall prediction 

concealed systematic differences in representational geometry. Larger LLMs aligned 

more closely with humans in semantic structure and neural synchronization, showing 

greater overlap with human semantic synchronization, but this was incomplete and 

dimension -dependent. The largest divergences emerged for animacy, emotion, and 

socialness, dimensions closely tied to agency, affect, and social experience. These 

findings show that LLMs capture substantial components of human shared neural 

semantics, but their alignment is selective . Larger or more capable models improve the 

approximation , whereas socially and affectively grounded dimensions are captured 

only partially. 

Keywords : neural synchronization, human -shared semantics, verbal communication, 

LLM, MEG 3

Introduction 

We use language to represent concepts and convey information, from simple greetings 

to complex ideas (Clark, 1996) . Successful mutual understanding depends on 

establishing a shared semantic space that links the speaker’s intended meaning with the 

listener’s interpretation (Hasson et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2021; Pickering & Garrod, 

2013; Stephens et al., 2010) . Central open questions concern the nature and structure 

of these shared semantic representations in the brain, the dimensions that constitute this 

shared space, how these dimensions shape neural alignment between speakers and 

listeners, and which dimension s are most relevant for interpersonal understanding. 

Large language models (LLMs) offer a timely computational tool as they generate 

explicit semantic representations for comparison with human semantic structure. 

This human -LLM comparison is important not only for evaluating artificial 

models but , more importantly, for understanding the nature of human semantic 

representations . Human semantics are often argued to be embodied and socially 

grounded, shaped by sensory -motor interaction with the physical world and by social 

pressures associated with communication and cooperation (Brothers, 1990; Dunbar, 

1998; Gallese & Lakoff, 2005) . In contrast, most LLMs derive semantic structure 

primarily from statistical regularities in text corpora, yielding high -dimensional 

representations that capture distributional similarity but may not fully reflect direct 

grounding in perception, action an d social interaction (Du et al., 2025; Kello et al., 2025; 

Xu et al., 2025) . If LLMs approximate human shared semantics, they should not only 

produce similar semantic structures in ratings or embeddings but also explain similar 

neural re sponses between interlocutor s’ brains . Conversely, systematic mismatches 

may be evident in semantic dimensions that depend strongly on embodied and 

interpersonal experience s.

A promising way to test these possibilities is to link semantic representations 

derived from humans and LLMs to an interpersonal neural signature of shared 

understanding . Interbrain neural coupling or neural synchronization (NS) has emerged 

as a neur omarker of speaker -listener alignment during communication (Hari & Kujala, 

2009; Hasson et al., 2012; Jiang et al., 2012; Montague et al., 2002; Stephens et al., 

2010) . Neural activity between speakers and listeners can align over time, particularly 

in speech - and language -related regions and in regions involved in mentalization and 

higher -level interpretation (Hasson et al., 2004; Stephens et al., 2010) . This coupling 4

can persist after accounting for shared acoustic input (Liu et al., 2020) , suggesting that 

NS reflects higher -level shared representations rather than sensory entrainment alone. 

Recent model -based work further shows that linguistic content originating in the 

speaker’s brain can be reflected in the listener’s brain, and that LLM embeddings can 

capture this speaker -listener coupling better than syntactic or articulatory models (Zada 

et al., 2024) . These findings suggest that LLMs have strong potential as computational 

tools for understanding shared linguistic representations. What remains unknown is not 

only to what extent LLMs predict shared neural responses, but also, importantly, 

whether they reproduce the dimensional organization of human -shared semantics. 

One key challenge is that semantics is inherently multidimensional (Binder et 

al., 2009; Huth et al., 2016) . When it comes to interpersonal shared representation , its 

structure could be multifaceted and shaped by human experiences . Social content 

constitutes a substantial portion of everyday conversation (Dunbar et al., 1997) , and 

emotional content can strongly modulate communicative intention and effectiveness 

(Koolagudi & Rao, 2012; Kousta et al., 2011; Scherer, 2003) . Sensory -motor 

experience shapes conceptual representations across categories (Gallese & Lakoff, 

2005; Martin, 2007; Pulvermüller & Fadiga, 2010; Vigliocco et al., 2011) , and temporal 

and spatial information is central to describing events and narratives (Dunbar et al., 

1997) . These semantic dimensions show consistency across individuals (Huth et al., 

2012; Jung -Beeman, 2005) , but it remains unclear which dimensions contribute most 

strongly to shared neural representations and, critically for this study, which semantic 

dimensions show the strongest convergence and divergence between humans and 

LLMs. 

Theories of semantic representation make different predictions about where 

human -LLM convergence or divergence should arise. Embodied cognition theory 

argues that conceptual knowledge is grounded in sensor imotor experience, so 

perceptual and action systems contribute directly to meaning (Gallese & Lakoff, 2005; 

Martin, 2007; Pulvermüller & Fadiga, 2010; Vigliocco et al., 2011) . Evidence that 

action -related words engage motor systems and that sensory concepts engage 

perceptual systems supports the view that semantics partly depends on grounded 

experience rather than being solely symbolic (Barsalou, 2008; Pulvermüller, 2005) .

This account predicts that shared semantics involve perceptual and action -related 

dimensions and suggests that text -trained LLMs may show less similarity with humans 

on grounded dimensions (Xu et al., 2025) . Complementing this view, the social -brain 5

hypothesis proposes that the human brain evolved to manage complex social 

environments, prioritizing social relationships, emotional cues, and intentions (Brothers, 

1990; Dunbar, 1998) . This account predicts that interpersonal shared semantics should 

strongly involve social and affective dimensions, and that socialness, animacy, and 

emotion may be particularly diagnostic of where LLMs converge with or diverge from 

human semantic represe ntations. 

In contrast, symbolic and distributional approaches suggest a n alternative route 

by which LLMs may approximate human semantic structure. Symbolic semantic 

theories, such as hierarchical network models, represent meaning through relations 

among abstract nodes (Collins & Quillian, 1969) . Distributional approaches further 

show that semantic structure can be learned from word co -occurrence patterns, and 

modern transformer -based LLMs scale this principle to large text corpora. From 

predictive embeddings such as Word2Vec (Mikolov et al., 2013) to state -of -the -art 

LLMs (e.g., the GPT family, Achiam et al. 2023 ; DeepSeek, Liu et al. 2024 ), these 

models learn rich semantic regularities from text corpora . At the same time, important 

limitations remain, especially in simulating the sensorimotor features of human 

concepts (Xu et al., 2025) . Multimodal training that incorporates visual information can 

improve alignment between models and human conceptual spaces , yielding more 

human -like object -concept representations (Du et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2025) . These 

findings motivate a dimension -resolved comparison in which some semantic 

dimensions may be well captured by LLMs, whereas others, especially those grounded 

in embodied, affective, or social factors, may show more persistent gaps. 

This study compares humans and LLMs in their explanations of shared semantic 

representations indexed by speaker -listener NS. If successful understanding requires 

listeners to reconstruct meaning from the speaker’s unfolding language, then semantic 

structure should account for NS beyond acoustic and phonological features (Hasson et 

al., 2012; Stephens et al., 2010) . Building on evidence that LLM representations 

increasingly reflect human neural responses to language (Antonello et al., 2023; 

Bonnasse -Gahot & Pallier, 2024; Gao et al., 2025) , we expected increasing model scale 

to enhance alignment with human -derived semantic structures in both behavioral 

ratings and NS. However, this convergence was not expected to be uniform across the 

semantic space. Dimensions learned from distributional text regularities may show 

closer correspondence with humans, whereas those more grounded in embodied, 

affective, or social experience might diverge. We predicted dimension -dependent 6

human -LLM convergence , with some dimensions aligning in semantic organization 

and NS contribution, while others reveal gaps due to different way s they learn to form 

th e dimensions .

To test these hypotheses, we used pseudo -hyperscanning MEG in a storytelling -

listening task with one speaker and 22 listeners. The speaker narrated eight stories, 

which were later played to listeners while they underwent MEG scanning . This design 

allowed us to measure speaker -listener neural alignment with identical auditory input, 

representing speech production -to -comprehension alignment during narrative 

transmission . We operationalized semantic representations using ten semantic 

dimensions , including Perception, Motor, Space, Time, Socialness, Animacy, Emotion, 

Attention, Causality , and Drive , to obtain behavioral ratings from both human s and five 

LLMs spanning different model scales. We developed a new interbrain semantic 

encoding analysis framework based on temporal response functions (TRFs) (Crosse et 

al., 2016) to predict listeners’ neural responses from the speaker’s activity, quantifying 

the unique contribution of each semantic dimension to the speaker -listener NS and the 

dimensional structure while controlling for acoustic and phonological features. 

This design enabled a dimension -resolved comparison of human - and LLM -

derived semantic representations across four analytic levels. First, we tested whether 

LLMs reproduced the semantic rating structure observed in human behavioral 

judgments. Second, we examined whether LLM -derived semantic spaces explained 

speaker -listener NS and had spatiotemporal neural profiles comparable to those of 

humans. Third, we quantified which semantic dimensions converged or diverged 

between humans and LLMs in their NS patterns . Fourth, we assessed whether these 

dimension -specific NS patterns predicted individual differences in listeners’ 

comprehension of the speaker’s stories. Together, these analyses move from behavioral 

semantic structure to neural alignment and then to compr ehension outcomes, examining 

the nature of shared semantics, identifying which components support neural alignment, 

and indicating where current LLMs approximate or depart from human shared semantic 

representations. 

Materials and Methods 

Participants 

A total of 48 participants participated in this study, including 6 speakers (3 females; 7

mean age: 23.3 years; age range: 22 -25 years) and 22 listeners (12 females; mean age: 

25.6 years; age range: 21 -37 years) in the MEG experiment (Hong et al., 2026) , along 

with another 20 human raters (16 females; mean age: 23.6 years; age range: 20 -30 years) 

for the behavioral rating experiment. All participants were native Mandarin speakers 

with normal hearing and had no history of neurological or psychiatric disorders. 

Participants provided wr itten informed consent prior to the study and received 

compensation for their participation. The study was approved by the Joint Chinese 

University of Hong Kong (CUHK) -New Territories East Cluster (NTEC) Clinical 

Research Ethi cs Committee (CREC) and the Research Ethics Committee at National 

Taiwan University. 

Experimental Procedure 

MEG experiment 

The experiment involved two sequential stages. The first stage was storytelling by the 

speaker, followed by story listening by the listeners, simulating unidirectional speaker -

listener communication (Fig. 1A). Six speakers were recorded during the original MEG 

storytelling session. The following speaker -listener analyses used one selected speaker, 

whose retelling was chosen for fluency, clarity and MEG data quality; the same 

recording was then presented to all 22 listeners. This protocol kept the auditory i nput 

identical for all listeners and addressed MEG constraints limiting simultaneous 

recording. 

In the storytelling stage, the speakers’ task involved two phases. First, they read 

each of the eight stories silently, sentence by sentence (sentence length : 6 -37 words, 

displayed for 2.4 -13.9 sec each to maintain natural pacing , resulting in total reading 

times of 7 -9.2 minutes per story ). After reading each story, participants spent a few 

minutes in brief preparation, then spontaneously retold each story. Their retellings were 

recorded using a microphone at 48 kHz, 16 -bit resolution. The stories were adapted 

from children’s stories and works by Wu Nien -Jen and Hualing Nieh Engle, with 

modifications to their length and complexity. For subsequent story -listening sessions 

and analyses, only the retelling recordings and the accompanying MEG data were used. 

In the story -listening stage, each listener completed eight scanning blocks, one 

for each of the eight stories (1182 ±51 words/story; 451 ±25 seconds/story; 60.1 minutes 

in total ) narrated by the selected speaker. Audio stimuli were presented binaurally via 8

air -tube earphones at 60 -70 dB SPL to ensure clarity and listening comfort. During each 

story, a fixation cross remained on the screen to promote sustained attention and 

minimize eye movements. After each story, participants answered three yes/no 

comprehen sion questions via button press to confirm engagement and understanding. 

After completing all stories, comprehension was evaluated using a test with an 

additional 56 questions (7 questions per story). Listener comprehension was quantified 

as the overall ac curacy across all 80 questions. This design allowed us to assess both 

online engagement and overall comprehension while maintaining a streamlined 

listening task. Story order was randomized across listeners. 

Human s emantic rating experiment 

Based on the transcripts of the story recordings , we extracted 766 content words (360 

verbs and 406 nouns). Each word was evaluated without context along ten semantic 

dimensions: Perception, Motor, Space, Time, Socialness, Animacy, Emotion, Attention, 

Causality and Drive (Fig. 1B and see Table S 1 for the working definition s). This set of 

dimensions was selected to encompass a broad spectrum of semantically relevant 

properties (Binder et al., 2016) . The ten semantic dimensions can be organized into two 

sets. The first four constitute embodied dimensions, ordered by the degree of 

concreteness -to -abstractness. Perception indexes sensory experience across modalities 

(e.g., visual, auditory, and somatosen sory). Motor captures action -related content and 

encompasses somatic/sensorimotor components. Time and Space are included as 

fundamental reference frames for describing events. The remaining six constitute 

human -social dimensions, arranged from relatively coarse to more fine -grained . These 

dimensions were intended to capture social -emotional influences. 

Human ratings were obtained from 20 participants who did not take part in the 

MEG experiment. Semantic dimensions were rated on a 7 -point Likert scale (1 = very 

low, 7 = very high), except that Emotion was evaluated on a 13 -point scale ( -6 = very 

negative, 0 = neutral, +6 = very positive) to separate valence. Before rating, participants 

were provided with instructions and working definitions for each dimension (Table S1), 

along with examples illustrating high and low ratings. Raters then separately evaluate d

how well each word related to or reflected the properties of the target dimensions 

according to these definitions . Ratings for each word were averaged across the 20 raters 

and used as predictors in subsequent feature -driven interbrain encoding analyses to 

quantify each dimension’s contribution to speaker -listener NS. To ensure consistency 9

across dimensions in TRF estimation , emotion ratings were rescaled to a range of 1 -7

for subsequent analyses .

MEG data acquisition and preprocessing 

Neuroimaging recordings 

Whole -head MEG data were acquired at a 1000 Hz sampling rate using a 306 -channel 

Elekta Neuromag TRIUX system (204 planar gradiometers and 102 magnetometers) 

housed in a magnetically shielded and soundproof chamber at the Imaging Center for 

Integrated Body , Mind, and Culture Research, National Taiwan University. Structural 

MRIs were obtained with a 3T Siemens Trio scanner using T1 -MPRAGE sequences 

(TR: 2.53 s, TE: 3.37 ms, FOV: 256 mm, 1 mm³ isotropic voxels) to generate 

participant -specific head models for MEG source analysis .

Preprocessing 

MEG recordings were processed with MaxFilter (Elekta Oy, Finland) for external noise 

reduction and head -movement correction. The data were then band -pass filtered 

between 0.3 and 45 Hz using a one -pass zero -phase FIR filter (order 6038; Kaiser -

windowed sinc; 1000 Hz sampling) to suppress slow drifts and high -frequency noise. 

This filter setting retained frequency components pertinent to speech -related cortical 

responses (Cogan & Poeppel, 2011; Lewis et al., 2015) while attenuating near -DC slow 

drifts that can undermine the stability of preprocessing procedures such as ICA 

(Winkler et al., 2015) . It also aligned with the band -pass ranges typically used in TRF -

based MEG speech studies (Chen et al., 2023; Karunathilake et al., 2023) .

Independent component analysis (Vigário et al., 2002) was used to detect and 

remove artifacts arising from eye movements/blinks, muscle activity, and cardiac 

signals. Each independent component (IC) was assessed using its spatial topography 

and temporal patterns . Identified artifact -related ICs (1 -5 per dataset) were removed by 

zeroing their contributions. The remaining neural components were then projected back 

to sensor space to obtain cleaned MEG data. 

To align the MEG signals with the speech stream, we recorded the audio not only 

with the microphone described above (48 kHz sampling rate) but also via a dedicated 

analog channel within the MEG system (1000 Hz). Although the MEG analog channel 

could not pr eserve fine -grained speech content due to its low sampling rate, it retained 

the acoustic envelope and was temporally locked to the MEG recordings. We therefore 10 

aligned the high -fidelity microphone recording with the MEG analog -channel audio by 

matching their envelopes to achieve precise temporal alignment between MEG and 

speech recordings. Specifically, we extracted the spectrograms of both signals and 

aligned them by maximizing their correlation (Kuhlen et al., 2012) . Subsequently, 

MEG data were epoch -aligned to story durations and downsampled to 100 Hz to 

optimize processing efficiency. 

Source reconstruction 

Cortical source reconstruction was conducted in MNE -Python (v1.5.1 ) (Gramfort et al., 

2014) under Python 3.11.6. Subject -specific head models were deriv ed from T1 -

weighted MRI data us ing FreeSurfer v7.4.0 and implement ed a single -layer boundary 

element model (BEM) (Fuchs et al., 2002) . MEG sensors were co -registered to MRI by 

aligning anatomical fiducials (nasion and bilateral preauricular points). The forward 

solution computed sensor -level magnetic field s generated by cortical dipoles 

distributed on source grids with 5-mm spac ing (8,192 vertices per hemisphere). The 

inverse solution used dynamic statistical parametric mapping (dSPM ) (Dale et al., 2000) 

with loose orientation constraints (0.2), depth weighting (0.8), and a signal -to -noise 

ratio of 1. Individual source estimates were morphed to the fsaverage template and 

parcellated using Schaefer ’s 1000 -parcel atlas (Schaefer et al., 2018) . Downstream 

analyses were restricted to 196 parcels within speech production and comprehension 

networks (Fig. S2 ): inferior frontal gyrus (IFG; L:10/R:13), pre/postcentral gyri 

(Pre/PostCG; L:15/R:14), supramarginal/inferior parietal (SMG/IPL; L:28/R:19), 

middle/inferior temporal gyri (MTG/ITG; L:18/R:19), superior temporal/Heschl ’s gyri 

(STG/HG; L:30/R:30). 

Semantic f eature extraction 

Transcription and linguistic feature labeling 

A native Mandarin speaker with transcription experience generated preliminary 

transcripts of eight story recordings. Two other native speakers then independently 

compared each transcript with the original audio and flagged any mismatches . All 

discrepancies were subsequently adjudicated in team consensus meetings. For 

subsequent annotation, the linguistic features were pre -specified , including the onsets 

and durations of consonants, vowels, tones, syllables, characters , and words. Trained 11 

annotators labeled these features in Praat (Boersma, 2011) following a standardized 

feature -labeling protocol. Furthermore, one acoustic feature ( combination of acoustic 

envelopes and onsets), two phonetic features (consonant onsets and vowel onsets), two 

pitch features ( F0 height and change) and one tonal feature (tone categor ies ) were 

included as features of non -interest in the following analysis of semantic features (see 

Hong et al. 2026 for detail ed speech feature extraction procedure ). 

Dimensional semantic ratings of large language models (LLMs) 

Five large language models (LLMs; GPT3.5, DeepSeek -v3, GPT4, GPT4o, and 

GPT4.1) were used for semantic ratings on the 766 content words (Fig. 1B) . The rating 

prompt for LLMs contained three parts: (1) the identical instructions and working 

definitions of the semantic dimensions that provided to human raters ; (2) the rating 

scale (-6 to 6 for Emotion and 1 to 7 for other dimensions ); (3) the target word to be 

rated . Ratings were collected one word at a time via an API to minimize contextual 

influences on subsequent ratings. To improve the robustness of the LLM -derived 

ratings, the full procedure was repeated five times for each LLM , and the mean score s

across the five repetitions w ere used in subsequent analyses . Because the exact model 

scale (i.e., the number of model parameters) of the GPT series hasn’t been published, 

we ranked the models by parameter scale as GPT3.5 < DeepSeek -v3 < GPT4 < GPT4o 

< GPT4.1, based on third -party estimates (Achiam et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Singh 

et al., 2023) . We treated model order as an ordinal proxy for model capability rather 

than a direct measure of parameter scale. Analyses using this index should therefore be 

interpreted as testing monotonic trends across the selected model series, not as 

estimating a pure parameter -scaling law. 12 

Figure 1. Experimental design and analysis framework for speaker -listener shared 

neural representations across 10 semantic dimensions. (A) MEG experimental setup. 

MEG recordings were obtained from a speaker narrating eight stories in Mandarin 

Chinese (example sentence shown: “今天我要说一个关于父亲的故事” / “Today 

I’m going to tell a story about father ”). The recorded audio clips were then presented 

to 22 listeners, and their brain activit ies were recorded using MEG. All verbs and nouns 

were analyzed in the subsequent analyses (the shaded words in the example sentence 

indicate those included: “说 , 父亲 , 故事” / “tell, father, story ”). ( B) Semantic rating s

derived from both LLMs and human raters. Semantic features were constructed by 

assigning, within each content word’s duration, the corresponding 10 -dimensional 

semantic rat ing scores (colored areas) and setting all other time points to zero (white 

areas) . (C) Two -stage feature -driven interbrain encoding modeling framework to 

estimate speaker -listener neural synchronization. TRF estimation was used to quantify 

each semantic feature in the speaker’s MEG data and to predict listeners’ neural 

responses. In the first stage, the semantic dimensions obtained from the LLMs and 

human raters were used as predictors to estimate feature -induced neural activities. In 

the second stage, these feature -induced neural activities served as inputs to a TRF 

model that predicted the listeners’ neural responses. In these TRF models, acoustic and 

phonetic features were included as control variables of no interest. 

Speaker -listener neural synchronization (NS) modeling 13 

To quantify speaker -listener NS during naturalistic speech processing, we used a 

multivariate temporal response function (mTRF) framework implemented in the mTRF 

Toolbox (Crosse et al., 2016) . This framework models the linear relationship between 

time -varying speech -related predictors and neural responses across multiple temporal 

lags. Here, we adapted this approach to estimate feature -driven speaker activity in the 

first stage and to assess the extent to which these feature -induced speaker signals 

predicted listeners’ neural responses in the second stage. 

Semantic feature time series were constructed from content words in the story 

transcripts and temporally aligned with the MEG recordings. For each semantic 

dimension, all time points within a content word’s duration were assigned that word’s 

rating on the relevant dimension (Fig. 1B) . Emotion ratings were rescaled to a 1 -7 range, 

whereas all other dimensions retained their original 1 -7 scale. Time points not 

corresponding to a rated content word were set to zero. 

To examine how specific semantic dimensions contribute to speaker -listener NS ,

we used a two -stage TRF modeling approach (Fig. 1C). In the first stage, we modeled 

the speaker’s neural encoding of individual semantic dimensions by training TRF 

models that used each dimension as input and the speaker’s MEG responses as output. 

The feature set included 10 semantic features derived from LLMs and human ratings, 

along with control acoustic and phonology features. The TRF model is defined as: 

𝑦 (𝑡 , 𝑛 ) = ( 𝜔 (𝜏 , 𝑛 )𝑥 (𝑡 − 𝜏 ) + 𝜀 (𝑡 , 𝑛 )

> !

where 𝑦 (𝑡 , 𝑛 ) denotes the speaker’s neural responses at the source parcel 𝑛 and time 𝑡 ,

𝑥 (𝑡 − 𝜏 ) denotes the feature at time 𝑡 − 𝜏 , 𝜔 (𝜏 , 𝑛 ) denotes the TRF weight at timelag 

𝜏 for source parcel 𝑛 , and 𝜀 (𝑡 , 𝑛 ) denotes the residual error. 

The TRF weights 𝜔 were estimated using ridge regression, an approach that 

optimized the fit between predicted and observed speaker neural activity by minimizing 

mean squared error while incorporating a regularization term to mitigate overfitting. To 

measure potential delayed and anticipatory neural responses related to speech 

processing , we analyzed a wide time -lag window spanning -2000 to 2000 ms. The 

strength of regularization (lambda) was fixed at λ = 10, providing sufficient constraint 

to ensure smooth TRF estimates and to minimize overfitting. 

The neural signals predicted by the TRF model ∑ 𝜔 (𝜏 , 𝑛 )𝑥 (𝑡 − 𝜏 )! were 

interpreted as feature -induced neural activities , reflecting the speaker ’s brain responses 

specifically attributable to the encoding of each feature. To control for acoustic and 14 

speech features, all six features (acoustic features, consonant onset, vowel onset, pitch 

height, pitch change, and tone categories) were jointly incorporated into a single TRF 

model to produce a unified neural estimate that accounts for their variances. 

In the second stage, the feature -induced speaker neural estimates served as 

predictors of listeners’ neural responses. Specifically, for each listener parcel, we fitted 

TRF models in which 𝑥 denotes the feature -induced speaker’s neural activities and 𝑦 

denoted the listeners’ neural signals , following a procedure analogous to that previously 

used in the first stage . The time lags were restricted to -20 00 ms to 2000 ms. To estimate 

the unique contribution of a given semantic dimension on NS , we adopted the unique 

variance explained (UVE) metric, which provide s a conservative quantification 

(Tezcan et al., 2023) . We first fit a full TRF model that included both the control 

features and the semantic feature(s) of interest . A corresponding reduced TRF model 

was then conducted, which was identical except for the omission of the feature(s) of 

interest. UVE of the feature(s) of interest was defined as the extra variance explained 

by their inclusion, calculated as the variance ex plained by the full model minus that 

explained by the matched reduced model :

𝑈𝑉𝐸 = 𝑅 "#$$ &'()$  

> *

− 𝑅 +)(#,)( &'()$ 

> *

𝑅 *(𝑦 , 𝑦 4) = 1 − ∑ (𝑦 - − 𝑦 4-)*

> -

∑ (𝑦 - − 𝑦 6)*

> -

where 𝑦 4- denoted the prediction of the signal at the time point 𝑡 and 𝑦 - denoted the 

corresponding true value ; 𝑦 6 represents the mean of 𝑦 - across all time points. This 

procedure attributes to each feature only the variance uniquely linked to it, thereby 

quantifying its specific contribution to speaker -listener NS .

To assess overall spatiotemporal NS patterns associated with LLMs and human 

ratings, the full model included control features and all 10 dimensions of each LLM or 

human rating, whereas the reduced model included only the control features. To analyze 

dimens ional NS patterns, the full model included the control features and one of the 10 

dimensions from each LLM or human rating, with the reduced model unchanged. To 

characterize human -LLM shared and distinct dimensional NS patterns, the full model 

combined all 10 human rating dimensions (aggregated into a single neural estimate in 

the first stage) with one LLM dimension. The reduced model excluded the LLM 

dimension. To quantify the degree of convergence between each LLM dimension and 

human ratings, we defined o verlap as the ratio of the variance explained ( R2) by the 

human -only reduced model to that explained by the full human -plus -LLM model. This 15 

measure indicates how much of the model ’s explanatory power, which includes LLMs, 

was already captured by human -derived semantic dimensions. Values closer to 1 

suggest greater overlap, while lower values indicate additional LLM -specific 

explanatory variance. 

The source -space analysis was restricted to speech - and language -related 

parcels that had previously shown robust involvement in speech production, 

comprehension, and interbrain NS (Hong et al., 2026) . We selected 157 parcels for the 

speaker and 190 parcels for the listeners , as these speaker/listener parcels exhibited 

significant NS with at least one listener/speaker parcel in the direct speaker -listener NS 

analysis (Hong et al., 2026) . The pipeline proceeded in two steps. First, for each speaker 

parcel, we estimated feature -induced neural activities separately. Second, we fitted a 

TRF that used the feature -induced neural activities from a given speaker parcel as input 

and predicted the neural responses in each of the listeners’ 190 parcels. Repeating this 

modeling for all speaker parcels produced a UVE matrix of size 157 × 190, along with 

TRF weights of size 1 0 features × 157 × 190 × 401 time points (-2000 to 2000 ms at 

100 Hz). Both stages underwent a leave -one -story -out cross -validation procedure to 

prevent overfitting. 

To emphasize region -level NS structure, parcel -level results were aggregated into 

ten bilateral anatomical regions covering the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) ,

precentral/postcentral gyri (Pre /Post CG) , supramarginal/inferior parietal cortex (IPL ),

middle/inferior temporal gyri (M/ITG) , and superior temporal/Heschl’s gyri (STG/HG) .

This regional pooling produced arrays of size 10 × 10 for UVE and 10 dimensions × 10 

× 10 × 401 for the TRF weights. 

Classification of NS patterns of LLMs and human ratings 

To test whether human - and LLM -derived semantic NS patterns differed in their 

multivariate organization beyond summary measures such as overall UVE or peak 

latency, we performed cross -validated classification analyses. Each model condition, 

including the fi ve LLMs and human ratings, was represented by listener -specific spatial 

and temporal NS patterns. 

For spatial classification, the input features were the vectorized UVE values across 

the 100 speaker -listener region pairs. For temporal classification, the input features 

were the TRF -weight time series across 401 lags from -2000 to 2000 ms, averaged 16 

across the ten semantic dimensions and the 100 speaker -listener region pairs. Thus, the 

spatial analysis tested whether models differed in the distribution of semantic NS across 

region pairs, whereas the temporal analysis tested whether models differed in their time -

lag profiles. 

For each pair of model conditions, we trained a linear discriminant analysis (LDA) 

classifier to distinguish their NS patterns. Classification performance was evaluated 

using leave -one -listener -out cross -validation. In each fold, all data from one listener 

were held out for testing, and the classifier was trained on the remaining listeners. This 

procedure ensured that classification accuracy reflected generalization to unseen 

listeners. To assess statistical significance, we generated a null distribution by repeating 

the full classification procedure 10,000 times with permuted model -condition labels. 

Observed classification accuracy was then compared against this permutation -based 

null distribution. 

Representati on similarity analysis 

Representati on similarity analysis (RSA) (Kriegeskorte et al., 2008) was used to 

quantify the correspondence between the dimensional structure of semantic ratings and 

semantic NS patterns across LLMs and human ratings . For each model condition, 

including the five LLMs and human ratings, we organized the data into dimension -wise 

matrices. For the rating analysis, the matrix contained semantic ratings for 766 content 

words across 10 dimensions, yielding a 766×10 word -by -di mension matrix. For the NS 

analysis, the matrix contained dimension -specific NS values across 100 speaker -

listener region pairs, yielding a 100×10 region -pair -by -dimension matrix. 

We then constructed representational dissimilarity matrices (RDMs) by 

computing pairwise dissimilarities between the ten semantic dimensions within each 

model. For rating patterns, dissimilarity was defined as 1 - cosine similarity between the 

word -wise rating vectors of two dimensions. For NS spatial patterns, dissimilarity was 

defined as 1 - Spearman’s correlation between the region -pair -wise NS vectors of two 

dimensions. This procedure produced a 10×10 dimensional RDM for each model. To 

compare representa tional structure between model s, we vectorized the upper triangular 

elements of each RDM, excluding the diagonal, and computed Spearman’s correlations 

between the vectorized RDMs. This yielded a model -by -model similarity matrix 

indexing the correspondence of dimensional representational geometry across humans 17 

and LLMs. 

To examine shared neural representations from human and LLM -derived 

semantics, we performed searchlight RSA on dimension -resolved TRF -weight patterns. 

For each model, data included TRF weights for 10 semantic dimensions across 100 

region pairs and 401 lags (-2000 to 2000 ms). Temporal RSA assessed representational 

geometry at each lag, averaging TRF weights within a 200 -ms window around each lag. 

This produced a vector of TRF weights for each semantic dimension across region pairs, 

from which dissimilaritie s were calculated with 1 - Spearman’s correlation, forming a 

10×10 RDM per lag and model. Spatial RSA evaluated each region pair separately; 

TRF weights across all 401 lags served as features, and dissimilarities were again 

computed with 1 - Spearman’s cor relation, resulting in a 10×10 RDM per region pair 

and condition. 

Human -LLM shared semantic representations were quantified by comparing 

each LLM’s RDM with the corresponding human -rating RDM. Specifically, the upper -

triangular elements of the human and LLM RDMs were vectorized and correlated using 

Spearman’s correlation . This procedure produced time -resolved human -LLM similarity 

profiles for the temporal searchlight analysis and region -pairwise human -LLM 

similarity maps for the spatial searchlight analysis. 

Multidimensiona l scaling and Procrustes alignment 

To characterize the relationship between the dimensional NS patterns derived from 

LLMs and from human ratings (10 dimensions × 100 region pairs), we first embedded 

the NS patterns into a two -dimensional space (10 dimensions × 2 axes ) via 

multidimensional scaling (MDS). We then applied Procrustes alignment (Kendall, 1989) 

to remove non -shape dissimilarities due to translation, rotation, and isotropic scaling, 

thereby highlighting the shape correspondence between their dimensional patterns . The 

objective function minimized in the Procrustes procedure can be written as follows: 

min 

> .,ℛ,1

‖𝑋 − (𝜌𝑌 ℛ + 1𝛾 2)‖*

where 𝑋 is the template NS patterns (10 × 2) calculated by aver aging across all speaker -

listener pairs and models (5 LLMs and human ratings), 𝑌 represent s the reduced NS 

patterns (10 × 2) of each speaker -listener pair and each model, 𝜌 is a scalar isotropic 

scaling factor, ℛ denotes an orthogonal matrix (2 × 2) representing rotation or 

reflection, 𝛾 is a translation vector (2 × 1), and 1 refers to a column vector (10 × 1) of 18 

all ones. This indicates that each NS pattern was aligned to a template derived from 

averaging across all models and speaker -listener pairs . The distance between two NS 

patterns is defined as the sum of the squared differences between them .

Statistical analysis 

To assess the statistical significance of each LLM ’s or human’s ability to explain NS, 

we compared its performance against a null (control) model based on randomized 

ratings. Specifically, for each word, we replaced the original rating with a random value 

uniformly sampled from its original range and then quantified the extent to which these 

randomized ratings explained NS using the same analysis pipeline as for the empirical 

ratings. This null -model construction preserves the temporal structure of the word 

sequence while selectively disrupting the semantic information carried by the ratings, 

thereby providing a more direct test of whether semantic content per se accounts for 

NS. 

To identify the significant time windows of TRF weights (10 dimensions × 100 

region pairs × 401 timelags for each model and each subject), they were averaged across 

region pairs and compared with baseline TRF weights derived from TRF models trained 

by surrogate speaker signals. These surrogates were created by phase -randomizing the 

original speaker signal while retaining its amplitude spectrum and inter -channel 

correlation structure (Prichard & Theiler, 1994) . This approach provides a stricter, 

physiologically motivated estimate of the time -lag interval exhibiting significant effects 

(Váša & Mišić, 2022) .

To assess the effect of model scale, we fitted a linear regression model for each 

neural or behavioral representation: 

𝑌 = 𝛽 3 + 𝛽 4𝑥 + 𝜀 

where 𝑌 denotes the neural or behavioral representational measure ; 𝑥 denotes the 

model -scale index ranging from 1 to 5 (corresponding to GPT3.5 , DeepSeek -v3 , GPT4 ,

GPT4o , and GPT 4.1) , and captures the linear effect of model scale ; and 𝜀 denotes the 

residual error. The overall statistical significance of the fitted linear model was assessed 

using an F -test comparing it to a constant null model (intercept -only). 

To assess model effect, we conducted a one -way ANOVA with model (6 levels: 

GPT3.5, DeepSeek -v3, GPT4, GPT4o, GPT4.1, Human) as a with in -subject factor. To 

assess the LLM effect, we conducted a one -way ANOVA with LLM (5 levels: GPT3.5, 19 

DeepSeek -v3, GPT4, GPT4o, and GPT4.1) as a within -subject factor. To assess the 

effect of semantic dimension, we conducted a one -way ANOVA with dimension (10 

levels: Perception, Motor, Space, Time, Socialness, Animacy, Emotion, Attention, 

Causality and Drive) as a within -subjects factor. To assess LLM and dimension effect, 

we conducted a two -way ANOVA with LLM (5 levels: GPT3.5, DeepSeek -v3, GPT4, 

GPT4o, and GPT4.1) and dimension (10 levels: Perception, Motor, Space, Time, 

Socialness, Animacy, Emotion, Atte ntion, Causality , and Drive ) as within -subject 

factors. To correct for multiple comparisons, we applied the false discovery rate (FDR) 

correction (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995) .

Predictive modeling of listeners ’ story comprehension 

To test whether NS patterns derived from LLMs and human ratings were related to 

listeners’ comprehension outcomes, we built and evaluated models that predict 

comprehension scores , defined as accuracy on comprehension questions administered 

after story listening. One participant (72.5% accuracy) was excluded from this analysis 

because 72.5% was more than three standard deviations below the group mean (mean 

= 92.2%, SD = 5.8 %). Predictors were the dimensional NS patterns spanning all 

speaker -listener region pairs (10 dimensions × 100 region pairs). For each LLM and for 

the human -rating condition, we fit a 10 -fold cross -validated linear model estimated by 

ordinary least squares with ridge regularization. Predictive performance was 

summarized using the coefficient of determination ( R²), which indicates the fraction of 

variance in comprehension accuracy explained by the NS predictors. To assess 

robustness, we repeated the randomized 10 -fold regression procedure 10,000 times a nd 

used the median R² across iterations as the performance estimate. This value was 

evaluated against a null distribution obtained by permuting the participant -wise 

mapping between NS patterns and behavioral accuracy. Dimension -specific prediction 

was computed with the same pipeline, except that the predictor set was restricted to the 

single -dimension NS vector for each dimension (1 × 100 region pairs). 

Results 

LLMs approximated human behavioral semantic structure with increasing model 

scale 

We first confirmed that the stories were reliably understood and provided a stable basis 20 

for examining shared semantic representations. Listeners showed high comprehension 

accuracy for the eight stories (mean = 92.2%, s.d. = 5.8%, range = 72.5 -98.8%), 

significantly above chance ( t(21) = 34.0, p = 7.6 × 10 -20 ). 

We then examined the extent to which LLMs and humans assigned similar 

semantic structure to the content words in the 10 -dimensional semantic space. Semantic 

ratings were obtained for 766 content words from 20 human raters and from five LLMs 

(GPT3.5, DeepSeek -v3, GPT4, GPT4o , and GPT4.1) (see distributions of the rating s in 

Fig. S1) . Repeating the LLM rating procedure with identical prompts five times showed 

expected high internal consistency (pairwise Pearson’s r = 0.80 for GPT3.5, 0.75 for 

DeepSeek -v3, 0.85 for GPT4, 0.89 for GPT4o, and 0.87 for GPT4.1). 

At the semantic structure level, r epresentational dissimilarity analysis (RSA; 

see Fig. 2A for the procedure) revealed broad similarity between LLMs and humans, 

as well as dimension -specific differences between them (Fig. 2A &B) . In the LLM 

RDMs, Animacy was relatively more separated from other dimensions, whereas in 

human RDMs, Space was the most prominent distinction (Fig. 2B) . RSA between LLM 

and human RDMs varied significantly across models ( F(4,95) = 18.3, p = 3.6 × 10 -11 ), 

with GPT4, GPT4o, GPT4.1, and DeepSeek -v3 all exhibiting signif icantly higher 

similarity to human than GPT3.5 (post -hoc p values from 9.9 × 10 -9 to 3.3 × 10 -7) (Fig. 

2C) . Larger models were associated with higher similarity to human semantic structure 

(R2 = 0.158, F(1,98) = 19.6, p = 2.5 × 10 -5) (Fig. 2C). 

At the individual -dimension level, most LLM -human correlations based on each 

dimension’s rating s were significant, except for Causality in GPT3.5 (permutation p =

0.054) (Fig. 2D). The LLM -human correlations were significantly correlated to LLM 

scales , with F-values ranging from 9.8 to 62.7 and p-values between 3.8 × 10 -12 and 2.3 

× 10 -3. The only exceptions are Emotion ( F(1,98) = 3.1, p = 0.083) and Animacy ( F(1,98) 

= 1.6, p = 0.211), as shown in Fig. 2 D. Larger LLMs more closely approximated the 

structure of human semantic behavior, but not uniformly across dimensions. 21 

Figure 2. Similarity between LLMs and humans in semantic rating patterns. (A)

Representational similarity analysis (RSA) was conducted on rating patterns between 

LLMs and humans . 766 words were rated by 5 LLMs and 20 humans on 10 semantic 

dimensions. Each rating formed a 10 -D profile to compute a representational 

dissimilarity matrix (RDM) showing pairwise dissimilarities based on semantic 

patterns. RDMs from LLMs and humans were t hen compared. (B) LLM and Human 

RDM s across 10 semantic dimensions. Dissimila rity between dimensions was 

calculated as the cosine distance across the entire set of words. ( C) Linear relationships 

between the LLM scale (i.e., number of parameters: 1 to 5 represent GPT3.5, 22 

DeepSeek -v3, GPT4, GPT4o and GPT4.1, respectively) and similarities to human 

RDMs . *, p < 0.05 (F-test) . (D) The linear relationships between LLM s cale and their 

similarity to human ratings for each dimension. Scatt er grey dots represent LLM’s 

similarity to ratings from individual hu man raters . Red dots and error bars denote the 

group mean and standard error of each LLM -human similarity . The solid lines represent 

the fitted linear regression model, and the shaded areas indicate the 95% confidence 

interval around the fitted line. Red a sterisks indicate significance of linear regression 

models (p < 0.05, F-tests) .

Human and LLM semantic spaces explained NS through different 

representation al structures 

We next examined how human - and LLM -derived semantic spaces explained speaker -

listener NS, which we used here as a measure of human -shared neural semantics. For 

each LLM and for the human ratings, we first estimated speaker -induced neural activity 

separately for each semantic dimension , then used those estimates to predict listeners’ 

neural responses , thereby quantifying semantic NS . When all ten dimensions were 

modeled jointly, all five LLMs and the human ratings yielded significantly higher 

overall predic tion than the randomized semantic baselines (t(21) range = 10.7 -11.3, p

range = 1.3 × 10 -13 to 1.5 × 10 -13 ) (Fig. 3A) . Because the randomized -rating baseline 

preserved the timing of content -word occurrences while only disrupting their semantic 

rating values, the above -chance NS prediction cannot be attributed simply to the 

temporal distribution of words in the narrative. Further, t his overall NS strength did not 

differ significantly across models and human (F(5,126) = 1.26, p = 0.28) (Fig. 3A) . Thus, 

at the aggregate level, both human - and LLM -derived semantic spaces captured 

significant speaker -listener NS beyond simple onset time of the words and their 

acoustic and phonological features .

At the spatiotemporal level, the resulting NS profiles were broadly similar 

across humans and LLMs (Fig. 3B) . Spatially, strong NS was concentrated between the 

speaker’s right IFG and parietal areas, STG/HG, and the listeners’ bilateral STG/HG. 

Temporally, NS extended from approximately -1200 to 400 ms , peaking at -250 ms 

(Fig. 3 C, left panel) , indicating speaker -leading NS . Peak latencies did not differ 

significantly across models ( F(5,126) = 0.08, p = 0.995) (Fig. S3, left panel) . A listener -

listener cont rol NS analysis showed significant synchronization from -650 to 500 ms 

with a peak at -10 ms (Fig. 3 C, right panel) , again with no effect of model ( F(5,126) =23 

0.02, p = 0.999) (Fig. S3, right panel) , confirming that the pronounced speaker -leading 

lag was specific to speaker -listener NS rather than a generic property of the acoustic 

analysis or due to the speaker hearing their own voice. 

Similar overall NS strength between LLMs and humans , however, did not imply 

they have a similar pattern of neural semantic organization . Pairwise multivariate 

classification based on spatial NS patterns distinguished most model pairs above chance 

(permutation p values ranging from 7.5 × 10 -4 to 0.0497), with the exceptions of GPT3.5 

versus human and GPT4.1 versus human (both p = 0.0836) (Fig. 3 D, left panel) .

Classification based on temporal NS patterns was weaker, reaching significance only 

for GPT3.5 versus DeepSeek -v3, GPT4 and GPT4o, for GPT4o versus GPT4.1, and for 

GPT4.1 versus human (permutation p values ranging from 0.0154 to 0.0369) (Fig. 3 D,

right panel ). When c ombining both spatial and temporal NS patterns, humans showed 

significantly distinct NS patterns compared to all LLMs (all permutation p values = 1.0 

× 10 -4). Th ese results indicate that , despite similar overall explanatory power, there are 

systematic differences in the multivariate structure of human - and LLM -derived NS 

patterns. 24 

Figure 3 . Semantic neural synchronization (NS) patterns derived from LLM s and 

humans . (A) Unique variance explained (UVE) by LLMs and humans in explaining 

speaker -listener NS . Random scores serve as the control baseline. Bars show mean ± 

SEM; circles indicate individual speaker -listener pairs; horizontal lines mark 

significant pairwise differences. (B) Spatial patterns of semantic NS across speaker -

listener region pairs. Line color and thickness indicate the prediction strength (i.e., UVE) 

of region pairs that showed significantly higher prediction than the random score (FDR -

corrected p < 0.05 ). (C) Normalized TRF -weight power for speaker -listener and 

listener -listener NS, averaged across dimensions and region pairs. Horizontal lines 

mark time windows that exceed phase -randomized baselines. (D) Classification 

accuracy for distinguishing models based on spatial and temporal NS patterns. 

Asterisks indicate above -chance classification accuracy based on permutation tests 

(FDR -corrected p < 0.05 ).25 

We thus examined dimension -based spatial NS patterns more directly to reveal 

human -LLM convergence and divergence using RSA (Fig. 4A). This approach takes 

into account all ten semantic dimensions in the representational modeling instead of 

aggregating them or examining them individually. We found that the semantic 

representation al NS similarity differed significantly across models (F(5,126) = 5.89, p =

6.4 × 10 -5). Human -LLM similarity also differed across LLMs ( F(4,105) = 8.38, p = 6.6 

× 10 -6), with GPT4, GPT4o , and GPT4.1 all showing significantly higher similarity to 

the human than GPT3.5 (post -hoc p values ranging from 2.7 × 10 -5 to 0.027) (Fig. 4B, 

left panel ). Moreover, human -LLM similarity increased significantly with model s cale 

(R2 = 0.214, F(1,108) = 30.7, p = 2.2 × 10 -7) (Fig. 4B, right panel) . Embedding the 

dimensional spatial NS patterns into a common space using multidimensional scaling 

and Procrustes alignment showed that Space and Animacy occupied relatively distinct 

positions (Fig. 4C ). Quantifying distance to the human in this aligned space showed a 

significant effect of LLM ( F(4,105) = 10.1, p = 6.2 × 10 -7; Fig. 4D) , where GPT3.5 was 

farther from the human than GPT4 , GPT4o and GPT4.1 (post -hoc p values ranging 

from 9.9 × 10 -8 to 2.9 × 10 -3), and DeepSeek -v3 was farther than GPT4.1 ( p = 6.1 × 10 -

> 3

). Across dimensions, distances also differed strongly ( F(9,210) = 51.4, p = 2.5 × 10 -48 ), 

with Animacy showing the greatest divergence from the human across LLMs (Fig. 4E) ;

there were also significant differences between LLM s for Perception, Time, Animacy 

and Emotion ( F(4,105) values = 3.4 -16.6, p values = 1.4 × 10 -9 to 0.029). Thus, although 

both humans and LLMs captured the semantic structure that explained NS, their 

dimension -based neural representational geometries diverged in systematic and model -

scale -dependent ways. 26 

Figure 4. Human -LLM similarity in dimension -based semantic NS patterns . (A)

Representational similarity analysis (RSA) of dimensional NS spatial patterns. For each 

model, NS patterns were organized as a region -pair × semantic -dimension matrix, and 

an RDM was computed across the ten semantic dimensions. Pairwise correlations 

between model RDMs yielded a model -level similarity matrix. (B) Left , RDM 

similarity among humans and LLMs with human -LLM similarities highlighted by a 

dashed box . Right , human -LLM NS representation similarity increased with model 

scale . Scatt er grey dots represent human -LLM similarity for each speaker -listener pair. 

Red dots and error bars denote the group mean and standard error of each LLM. The 

solid lines represent the fitted linear regression model, and the shaded areas indicate the 27 

95% confidence interval around the fitted line. *, p < 0.05. (C) MDS -Procrustes 

embedding of dimensional NS patterns, showing the relative positions of the ten 

semantic dimensions for both humans and LLMs in a common representational space. 

(D) Overall distance between each LLM and human ratings in the aligned NS space, 

averaged across dimensions. Bars show mean ± SEM; horizontal lines indicate 

significant pairwise differences. (E) Dimension -specific distance between each LLM 

and human. Asterisks indicate s ignificant differences among LLMs for a given 

dimension (p < 0.05, one -way ANOVA) .

Dimension -dependent human -LLM semantic NS overlap 

We next quantified the extent to which LLM -derived semantic NS overlapped with the 

human -derived semantic NS pattern and identified which dimensions captured LLM -

specific variance beyond the human semantic model. For each LLM -derived semantic 

dimension, we estimated its additional contribution to NS after controlling for the full 

10 -dimensional human semantic model. This additional contribution indexes the non -

overlapping variance explained by the LLM dimension that is not captured by human -

rated semantic d imensions (i.e., degree of human -LLM divergence ).

The extra contribution differed markedly across models and dimensions (Fig. 

5A &B, left panel ). GPT3.5 showed significant extra contribution for all dimensions 

(t(21) = 7.5 -12.3, p = 5.5 × 10 -10 to 3.9 × 10 -7) except Animacy ( t(21) = -12.7, p = 0.999). 

DeepSeek -v3 showed significant extra contribution only for Emotion ( t(21) = 11.4, p =

5.5 × 10 -10 ). GPT4 showed significant extra contribution for Emotion ( t(21) = 11.5, p =

5.5 × 10 -10 ) and Attention ( t(21) = 4.7, p = 1.7 × 10 -4). GPT4o showed significant 

additional contributions to Socialness, Emotion, Causality, Drive and Attention ( t(21) =

4.8 -11.9, p = 5.5 × 10 -10 to 1.3 × 10 -4). GPT4.1 showed significant extra contribution 

for Emotion ( t(21) = 11.7, p = 5.5 × 10 -10 ) and Causality ( t(21) = 4.7, p = 1.6 × 10 -4). Thus, 

LLM -derived semantic dimensions diverged from the human semantic mo del in a 

model -specific, non -overlapping way and varied sharply across dimensions, especially 

in social -affective ones. 

We then quantified the degree of convergence between each LLM and the 

human semantic model (Fig. 5 B, right panel & 5 C). Convergence differed significantly 

across LLMs ( F(4,105) = 121.8, p = 1.6 × 10 -38 ), with GPT4.1 and DeepSeek -v3 showing 

the highest convergence, GPT4o and GPT4 intermediate, and GPT3.5 the lowest (Fig. 28 

5B, right panel) . Convergence also increased significantly with model s cale (R2 = 0.390, 

F(1,108) = 70.6, p = 1.9 × 10 -13 ; Fig. 5 B, right panel) . At the level of individual dimensions, 

LLMs differed significantly for every dimension except Emotion (all other dimensions: 

F(4,105) = 46.3 -341.3, p = 3.3 × 10 -58 to 2.4 × 10 -22 ; Emotion: F(4,105) = 0.24, p = 0.91 ;

Fig. 5 C). Emotion also showed the least degree of convergence with humans across 

LLMs . Increased model s cale predicted greater convergence for all dimensions (F(1,108) 

ranged from 13.5 to 177.2 , p-values range from 1.6 × 10 -23 to 4.6 × 10 -4) except Emotion 

(F(1,108) = 0.17, p = 0.68) and Causality ( F(1,108) = 0.59, p = 0.49) (Fig. 5 C). Together, 

these analyses show that human -LLM overlap in semantic NS was partial and that both 

the shared fraction and the model -specific remainder varied strongly with semantic 

dimension. 29 

Figure 5. Shared and distinct components of human - and LLM -derived semantic 

NS across dimensions . (A) Extra variance in NS explained by each LLM -derived 

semantic dimension beyond the full human semantic model. Values above zero indicate 

LLM -specific variance not captured by human ratings; asterisks indicate significant 

extra contributions. (B) Left , s chematic summary of LLM convergence and divergence 

NS components. The central grey squares represent the variance explained by the 

human semantic model . The surrounding colored squares represent signi ficant 

additional LLM -specific contributions. Square size indicates NS magnitude; 

percentages indicate extra contribution relative to the human model. Right , d egree of 30 

human -LLM convergence in semantic NS, defined as 𝑅 *(human )/𝑅 *(model +

human ). Values closer to 1 indicate greater convergence with the human semantic 

model. Mean convergence across dimensions increased with model scale . Scatt er grey 

dots represent human -LLM similarity for each speaker -listener pair. Red dots and error 

bars denote the group mean and standard error of each LLM. The solid lines represent 

the fitted linear regression model, and the shaded areas indicate the 95% co nfidence 

interval around the fitted line. The red asterisk represents the significance of the linear 

regress ion model. (C) Relationship between model scale and convergence for each 

semantic dimension. Model scale is indexed from 1 to 5, corresponding to GPT -3.5, 

DeepSeek -v3, GPT -4, GPT -4o, and GPT -4.1 . Scatt er grey dots indicate individual 

speaker -listener pairs; red lines and shaded areas show fitted linear trends with 95% 

confidence intervals ; asterisks indicate significant model -scale effects. 

Human -LLM shared semantic geometry was temporally and spatially structured 

The preceding analyses showed that LLM -derived semantic NS partially overlapped 

with human -derived semantic NS, and that this overlap increased with model scale. We 

further examined where and when this human -LLM shared and distinct semantic 

geometry was ex pressed in space and time. To do so, we applied a searchlight RSA to 

dimension -resolved NS patterns across time lags and speaker -listener region pairs (Fig. 

6A). For each model, we constructed RDMs across the ten semantic dimensions using 

the corresponding temporal or spatial NS patterns, and then quantified human -LLM 

similarity by correlating each LLM -derived RDM with the human -derived RDM. 

In the temporal domain, larger LLMs showed stronger similarity to human -

derived semantic representations across time windows (Fig. 6B). Specifically, the GPT 

family (i.e., GPT4, GPT4o and GPT4.1 ) showed a strongly similar temporal profile, 

with human -LLM similarity peaking at approximately -730 ms. DeepSeek -v3 showed 

modest similarity and a similar peak time lag. By contrast, GPT3.5 showed substantially 

lower similarity and an earlier peak at approximately -920 ms. Thus, model -scale 

convergence was not limi ted to overall NS magnitude or rating -level similarity; it was 

also evident in the timing of the shared dimensional semantic geometry between human 

and LLM -derived NS patterns. 

In the spatial domain, human -LLM similarity also increased with model scale 

and was distributed across multiple speaker -listener region pairs (Fig. 6C). The 

strongest model -scale effects were observed in region pairs involving the speaker’s 31 

bilateral frontotemporal -parietal regions, along with listeners’ widespread left -

hemispheric regions and right parietal -frontal areas. These findings indicate that 

human -LLM shared semantic representations were expressed through distributed 

speaker -listener neural pathways with broad timing windows that peak at about -700ms .

Together, the temporal and spatial RSA results show that larger LLMs more closely 

approximated the spatiotemporal geometry of human shared semantic NS. 32 

Figure 6. Spatiotemporal representational similarity between human - and LLM -

derived semantic NS . (A) Searchlight RSA framework for quantifying human -LLM 

similarity in dimensional NS patterns. For each model, TRF weights for 10 semantic 

dimensions were used to construct RDMs, separately for each time point and each 

speaker -listener region pair . Human -LLM similarity was computed as the Spearman ’s 

correlation between corresponding human and LLM RDMs. (B) Temporal profile of 

human -LLM similarity. Lines show mean ± SEM similarity between human ratings and 

each LLM across time lags. Larger LLMs showed higher similarity, peaking around -

730 ms; GPT3.5 showed distinctly lower similarity with an earlier peak around -920 33 

ms. (C) Spatial distribution of human -LLM similarity across speaker -listener region 

pairs. Matrix plots show the similarity between LLM s and human s. The lower -right 

brain map highlights the 20 region pairs with the strongest model -scale effects , as 

indicated by linear regression F values. 

Semantic NS predicted individual differences in narrative comprehension 

Finally, we tested whether dimension -resolved semantic NS was behaviorally relevant 

by assessing its ability to predict individual differences in listeners’ comprehension of 

the speaker’s stories. When all ten semantic dimensions were combined, NS patterns 

derived from each of the five LLMs and from human ratings significantly predicted 

comprehension performance ( R2 range = 0.340 to 0.378 ; permutation -based p = 0.008; 

Fig. 7A ), but their overall comprehension prediction did not differ (ps > 0.05) . Thus, 

semantic NS captured by both human - and LLM -derived ratings was not only neurally 

significant but also informative about listeners’ understanding. 

Dimension -specific analyses showed widespread but model -dependent 

predictive effects (Fig. 7B). Across both LLMs and human ratings, NS from all ten 

semantic dimensions significantly predicted comprehension above chance 

(permutation -based p-values ranging from 0.0040 to 0.0344). For GPT3.5, DeepSeek -

v3, and GPT4o, Animacy showed stronger predictive performance than all other 

dimensions (permutation -based p-values ranging from 0.0018 to 0.0029). For GPT4.1, 

Perception showed the strongest predictive performan ce ( p = 0.0015). For human 

ratings, Animacy predicted comprehension better than most dimensions, except 

Perception, Socialness, and Attention (significant differences: p-values ranging from 

0.0066 to 0.0141; non -significant differences: p-values ranging from 0.0584 to 0.1950). 

Together, these findings show that semantic NS robustly predicted listeners’ 

comprehension, but the dimensions most informative for prediction differed across 

humans and LLMs. 34 

Figure 7 . Semantic NS patterns predicted listeners’ story comprehension. (A)

Prediction of listeners’ comprehension from overall semantic NS patterns combining 

all 10 dimensions. Dots indicate R² values from 10,000 bootstrapped 10 -fold cross -

validation runs; horizontal lines mark significant pairwise differences. (B) Dimension -

specific prediction performance for LLM - and human -derived semantic NS. Asterisks 

indicate predictions that are significantly above the permutation baseline (after 

correction for multiple comparisons ). The three best -performing dimensions were 

highlighted in red labels and asterisks .

Discussion 

Our findings provide a dimension -resolved account of shared semantics in naturalistic 

narrative speech and use this framework to assess human -LLM convergence and 35 

divergence in explaining interpersonal semantic representations. Combining 

storytelling -listening pseudo -hyperscanning MEG with interbrain neural 

synchronization (NS) modeling , we examined whether semantic alignment between a 

speaker and listeners can be characterized as a multidimensional structure. Ten 

semantic dimensions derived from both human and LLM ratings explained speaker -

listener NS beyond word onset and across acoustic and phonological controls, 

indicating that shared neural semantics cannot be reduced to general word 

representations and lower -level speech features. Although LLM -derived ratings 

achieved overall NS prediction comparable to human ratings, the semantic dimensions 

supporting this alignment showed systematic differences in representational geometry. 

Larger models showed stronger convergence with human sema ntic ratings and human -

derived NS patterns, but this convergence was partial and varied across dimensions, 

with strong divergences observed for animacy, emotion and socialness. Finally, 

semantic NS predicted individual differences in listeners’ story comprehension, linking 

dimension -resolved NS to behavioral understanding. 

Comparable NS strength s do not indicate an equivalent shared semantic 

representation structure 

LLM -derived semantic ratings explained speaker -listener NS at a level comparable to 

human ratings overall, yet differed from humans in the organization of the semantic 

dimensions that drove this alignment. This dissociation is theoretically insightful 

because it shows that strong neural prediction alone is insufficient evidence that an 

artificial model represents shared semantics in a human -like way. A model may capture 

broad semantic regularities that are useful for predicting human -shared neural 

alignment while differing from humans in how specific semantic dimensions are 

organized, weighted, and mapped onto speaker -listener neural pathways. 

This distinction refines how human -LLM alignment should be evaluated in 

cognitive neuroscience. Prior work shows that LLM representations can predict neural 

responses during naturalistic language processing and capture aspects of speaker -

listener shared linguistic content (Antonello et al., 2023; Bonnasse -Gahot & Pallier, 

2024; Zada et al., 2026) . Our findings suggest that overall prediction accuracy provides 

only a coarse measure of human -model alignment. A stricter test is whether model -

derived semantics reproduce the dimensional geometry of human -shared semantic NS, 

including the organization of semantic dimensions and the spatiotemporal NS patterns 36 

that support them . By this criterion, LLMs showed significant but incomplete 

convergence with humans. 

Thus, the findings support a selective account of human -LLM alignment and, 

more broadly, of human -shared semantic representations. Although LLMs captured 

substantial components of the semantic s that support speaker -listener NS, their 

convergence with humans was incomplete. This pattern suggests that shared neural 

semantics includes both distributionally learnable structure, as represented by LLMs, 

and dimensions more closely tied to human experience. 

Animacy, emotion , and socialness reveal the strongest human -LLM divergence 

The strong human -LLM divergences emerged in animacy, emotion, and socialness. 

These dimensions are theoretically diagnostic because they are not merely lexical or 

distributional properties. They are closely linked to agency, affective experience, 

interpersonal relati ons, and social inference. This divergence supports the view that 

human semantic representations are shaped not only by linguistic co -occurrence or text 

regularities but also by embodied and social experience (Gallese & Lakoff, 2005; 

Martin, 2007; Pulvermüller & Fadiga, 2010; Vigliocco et al., 2011) . By contrast, most 

LLMs derive semantic structure primarily from statistical regularities in text, which 

may allow them to approximate many semantic associations while leaving 

experientially grounded dimensions only partially captured (Du et al., 2025; Xu et al., 

2025) .

Emotion showed particularly weak convergence with human -derived semantic 

NS and showed little improvement with model scale. This suggests that LLMs may 

approximate emotion -related meanings at the distributional level but differ from 

humans in how affective meaning contributes to shared neural semantics. Human 

emotion semantics are shaped by bodily states, motivational relevance, interpersonal 

context, and intentional meaning. These experiential factors are central to the 

development of affective conceptual representation (Kousta et al., 2011; Vigliocco et 

al., 2014) , but they are not directly available to text -trained language models. This may 

explain why emotion remained difficult for LLMs to align with human shared neural 

semantics. 

Animacy also diverged strongly from human -derived NS patterns. In 

communicative contexts, animacy often conveys information about agency, intention, 

mental states, and social roles. Human listeners may use animacy cues to infer who is 37 

acting, who has goals, whose perspective matters, and how events should be interpreted. 

This interpretation aligns with evidence that animate entities are represented in partially 

specialized semantic networks (Fairhall & Caramazza, 2013; Hauptman & Bedny, 2025) 

and with broader work on mental -state attribution and social cognition (Frith & Frith, 

2010; Saxe & Kanwisher, 2003) . LLMs can learn many animacy -related properties and 

regularities from text, but these representations may not fully reproduce the socially 

grounded inferences that shape human semantic alignment. 

Socialness provides a particularly informative test case for human -LLM 

convergence because social meaning is difficult to reduce to statistical regularities .

Human social semantics depends on conceptual knowledge about people, interpersonal 

relations, norms, intentions, and context -appropriate behavior , and naturalistic 

neuroimaging evidence suggests that social and semantic cognition are supported by 

partially overlapping but distinct neural systems (Binney & Ramsey, 2020; Thye et al., 

2024) . Although LLMs can learn many text -based regularities in social language, their 

social -language understanding remains uneven across domains, and human -like 

performance on some theory -of -mind tasks does not necessarily imply human -like 

social representatio n (Choi et al., 2023; Strachan et al., 2024) . The observed divergence 

in socialness may therefore indicate that LLMs capture distributional associations in 

social content without fully aligning with the experience -grounded and interaction -

sensitive structure of human social semantics. Together with divergences in animacy 

and emotion, this pattern suggests that the strongest human -LLM gaps arise where 

meaning depends most strongly on agency, affect, and interpersonal experience 

(Vigliocco et al., 2014; Xu et al., 2025) .

Model scale selectively improves convergence 

A second important finding is that human -LLM convergence generally increased with 

model scale or capability. Larger LLMs showed greater similarity to human semantic 

ratings, stronger similarity to human -derived dimensional NS patterns, and greater 

overlap with the structure of the human semantic representation . This pattern aligns 

with evidence that larger language models show stronger alignment with human 

behavioral and neural responses during naturalistic language processing (Antonello et 

al., 2023; Bonnasse -Gahot & Pallier, 2024; Gao et al., 2025) .

However, model scaling did not yield uniform convergence across semantic 

dimensions. At the behavioral rating level, larger models showed stronger similarity to 38 

human ratings for most dimensions, but not for Emotion or Animacy. At the neural 

level, scaling increased human -LLM convergence for most dimensional NS patterns, 

but this effect was absent for Emotion and Causality, and Animacy remained the most 

divergent dimension in the shared NS geometry. This uneven profile suggests that 

scaling improves alignment for dimensions that are more recoverable from linguistic 

distributional structure, including aspects of temporal and perceptual meaning, 

consistent with evidence that larger language models better predict human neural 

responses and can encode structured spatial and temp oral information (Antonello et al., 

2023; Gurnee & Tegmark, 2024) . In contrast, scaling appears less sufficient for 

dimensions that depend more strongly on affective grounding, agency -related 

interpretation, social inference, or event -level causal structure. This interpretation is 

consistent with evidence that text -only LLMs show weaker alignment with human 

concepts when sensory -motor grounding is required, that emotion contributes to 

semantic representation, and that LLMs show uneven performance in social -pragmatic 

and theory -of -mind tasks (Choi et al., 2023; Strachan et al., 2024; Vigliocco et al., 2014; 

Xu et al., 2025) . Larger models are therefore more human -like in some aspects of shared 

neural semantics, but scaling alone does not eliminate the gap between text -derived 

semantic structure and human semantic experience. 

Multidimensional shared neural semantics are behaviorally relevant 

The behavioral prediction results further suggest that dimension -resolved semantic NS 

is functionally meaningful. NS patterns derived from both human and LLM ratings 

significantly predicted individual differences in listeners’ story comprehension, 

consiste nt with prior evidence that stronger speaker -listener coupling predicts better 

communicative understanding and that neural coupling is linked to semantic features 

of speech (Li et al., 2024; Stephens et al., 2010) . These findings argue against the 

interpretation that semantic NS merely reflects shared auditory input or model -fitting 

artifacts (Liu et al., 2020) . Instead, they suggest that the degree to which semantic 

dimensions organize speaker -listener neural alignment contains information about how 

successfully listeners reconstruct narrative meaning. 

At the dimension level, predictive effects were widespread but model -

dependent. Animacy was especially predictive for several LLMs and for human ratings, 

whereas Perception was the strongest predictor for GPT4.1. This pattern is consistent 

with situation -model theories, which propose that narrative comprehension requires 39 

tracking agents, goals, causal relations, temporal structure, spatial context, and 

perceptual details as events unfold (Radvansky & Zacks, 2014; Zwaan & Radvansky, 

1998) . The strong role of Animacy is also consistent with evidence that animacy is not 

a simple living -nonliving distinction but involves agency, mobility, and behavioral 

relevance (Jozwik et al., 2022) . Importantly, behavioral relevance and human -LLM 

divergence are not identical. Animacy was both strongly divergent and strongly 

predictive, whereas Perception was behaviorally important despite showing less 

divergence from the human -derived NS geometry. This distinction clarifies that human -

LLM divergence identifies where models differ from humans, whereas behavioral 

prediction identifies which semantic NS patterns explain individual differences in 

understanding. 

Spatiotemporal semantic NS reflects one -way narrative transmission 

The spatiotemporal profile of semantic NS further constrains the interpretation of 

shared semantic representations. Across human - and LLM -derived semantic spaces, 

semantic NS showed a broad temporal window dominated by speaker -leading 

alignment. The overal l semantic NS signal peaked at approximately −250 ms, 

indicating that speaker -derived semantic activity predicted listeners’ later responses. 

This pattern is consistent with prior evidence that speaker –listener coupling during 

natural communication unfolds across time and supports successful understanding 

(Chang et al., 2024; Stephens et al., 2010) . A smaller listener -leading component may 

reflect anticipatory or predictive processes during comprehension, consistent with 

hierarchical predictive accounts of speech understanding (Caucheteux et al., 2023; 

Friston, 2005; Stephens et al., 2010) .

Spatially, semantic NS was mainly expressed through coupling between the 

speaker’s frontal -temporal -parietal regions and the listeners’ temporal cortices. This 

pattern is consistent with neurocognitive models in which speech production recruits 

frontal, temporal, and parietal systems for planning, lexical -semantic access, and 

integration, whereas comprehension relies strongly on temporal -lobe mechanisms for 

mapping speech input onto meaning (Binder et al., 2009; Friederici, 2011; Hickok, 

2012; Hickok & Poeppel, 2007) . The present study’s contribution lies in demonstrating 

how semantic dimensions influence the activation of specific speaker -listener pathways. 

The searchlight RSA further showed that human -LLM shared semantic 

geometry was temporally and spatially structured. Importantly, the peak around -730 40 

ms was also speaker -leading, but it indexed a different level of alignment from the -250 

ms peak. Whereas the -250 ms peak reflected the strength of overall semantic NS, the 

-730 ms peak reflected the time at which the dimensional geometry of semantic NS was 

most similar between human - and LLM -derived models. This longer speaker -leading 

lag may indicate that the structured organization among semantic dimensions emerges 

over a b roader temporal window than overall semantic coupling strength, possibly 

reflecti ng higher -order integration of semantic relations across dimensions . This 

interpretation is consistent with evidence that LLM -derived linguistic spaces can 

capture information transmitted from speaker to listener brains during natural 

communication (Zada et al., 2024). However, because the present study used pseudo -

hyperscanning, these dynamics should be interpreted as one -way narrative transmission 

from speaker to listener rather than as reciprocal dialogue. 

Limitations and future directions 

Several limitations should be noted. First, the pseudo -hyperscanning design modeled 

one -way narrative transmission rather than real -time interaction. Although this 

controlled auditory input across listeners, it could not capture turn -taking, adaptation, 

or mutual prediction. Future hyperscanning studies during natural dialogue should test 

whether reciprocal interaction affects the same dimension -specific convergence and 

divergence patterns, especially for socialness and emotion (Hari & Kujala, 2009; 

Montague et al., 2002; Pickering & Garrod, 2004; Zada et al., 2026) . Second, the study 

used one selected speaker and selected speech -language ROIs. This improved 

experimental control and reduced model complexity, but limits generalizability across 

speakers, discourse styles, and broader narrative or social -cognitive network s. Future 

work should include multiple speakers and extend the analysis to whole -brain networks. 

Third, LLMs differed not only in estimated scale or capability but also in training data, 

tuning, alignment procedures, and possible multimodal exposure. Mod el scale should 

therefore not be treated as the sole source of human -LLM convergence. Future studies 

should systematically compare text -only and multimodal models to test whether 

perceptual or social grounding improves alignment with human semantic NS, 

especially for perception, emotion, animacy, and socialness (Du et al., 2025; Xu et al., 

2025) . Finally, the semantic space was limited to ten predefined dimensions and 

Mandarin content words. Future work should incorporate additional semantic 

dimensions, contextualized embeddings, discourse -level variables, cross -linguistic 41 

comparisons, and individual differences in social cognition, affective traits, language 

experience, or narrative ability. 

Conclusion 

We demonstrate that human -shared semantic representations during narrative speech 

are multidimensional and measurable through speaker -listener NS . Human - and LLM -

derived semantic spaces both explained interbrain NS and predicted comprehension, 

supporting LLMs as models of shared semantics. However, the overall prediction did 

not imply identical representational geometry. Larger models showed stronger 

convergence with human NS, but gaps remained, especially in the dimensions of 

animacy, emotion, and socialne ss, which are linked to agency, affect, and interpersonal 

experience. Linking semantic dimensions, neural alignment, and comprehension 

provides a framework for evaluating the nature of shared semantics and how well LLMs 

mirror human semantics in naturalistic narratives. 42 

Supplementary Materials 

Table S 1. Working definition of each semantic dimension 

Dimension Working definition 

Perception The extent to which the meaning of a word can easily and quickly 

trigger corresponding sensory experience (including sight, sound, 

touch, taste, smell, etc) in your mind. 

Motor The extent to which the meaning of a word can easily and quickly 

trigger corresponding bodily movement or action execution in your 

mind .

Space The extent to which the meaning of a word relates to spatial 

information, including location, direction, distance, path, scene, etc. 

Time The extent to which the meaning of a word relates to time, including 

early or late, length, sequence, frequency, etc. 

Socialness The extent to which the meaning of a word relates to interpersonal 

interaction, group dynamics, or social norms .

Animacy The extent to which the meaning of a word relates to humans, living 

beings, agency, or biological activity. 

Emotion The extent to which the meaning of a word relates to positive or 

negative affective states , feelings, or emotional responses. 

Attention The extent to which the meaning of a word relates to attention, focus, 

salience, or cognitive selection of stimuli. 

Causality The extent to which the meaning of a word implies a causal or 

correlated relationship or agency .

Drive The extent to which the meaning of a word relates to motivation, 

goals, needs, or desires. 43 

Table S 2. Descriptive statistics and representative examples of subjective ratings 

across the ten semantic dimensions. For each dimension, the table reports the mean, 

standard deviation (SD), minimum rating (Min), the example word with the minimum 

rating, maximum ra ting (Max), and the example word with the maximum rating. 

English translations of the Chinese example words are provided in parentheses. 

Dimension Mean SD Min Min example Max Max example 

Perception 3.276 1.139 1.15 方式 /method 6.25 霓虹灯 /neon light 

Motor 2.701 1.215 1 年纪 /age 6.45 敲门 /knock 

Space 1.595 0.985 1 头发 /hair 5.95 机场 /airport 

Time 1.423 0.700 1 木头 /wood 6.7 小时 /hour 

Socialness 2.132 1.177 1 衣柜 /closet 6 婚姻 /marriage 

Animacy 3.206 1.676 1 香皂 /soup 7 父亲 /father 

Emotion 0.296 0.873 -3.789 哭/cry 5.15 爱/love 

Attention 1.536 0.483 1 被子 /quilt 4.8 关心 /care 

Causality 1.423 0.438 1 床/bed 5.5 导致 /cause 

Drive 1.549 0.585 1 门/door 5.45 希望 /hope 44 

Figure S1. Distributions of semantic ratings derived from LLMs and human raters 

across the ten semantic dimensions. The x -axis represents rating scores, and the y -axis 

represents probability density. Gray histograms show the empirical rating distributions, 

and black curves show the fitted density distributions. 45 

Figure S2. Speech and language regions of interest (ROIs) used in the NS analysis. 

Bilateral cortical ROIs are displayed on brain surface maps and include the inferior 

frontal gyrus (IFG), precentral/postcentral gyri (Pre/PostCG), supramarginal/inferior 

parietal cortex (SMG/IPL), superior temporal/Heschl’s gyri (STG/HG), and 

middle/inferior temporal gyri (MTG/ITG). These regions were selected to cover frontal, 

temporal, sensorimotor, and parietal components of speech production and 

comprehension networks. T his ROI definition is consistent with neurocognitive models 

of language that emphasize distributed frontal -temporal -parietal systems for speech 

perception, production, and integration. 46 

Figure S3. Peak latencies of semantic NS for speaker -listener and listener -listener pairs. 

Each dot represents one pairwise estimate, and bars indicate mean ± SEM. Speaker -

listener peak latencies quantify the temporal lag at which speaker -derived activity most 

strongly predicted listener responses, whereas listener -listener peak latencies provide a 

control estimate of synchronization across listeners exposed to the same narratives. This 

comparison distinguishes directional speaker -to -listener alignment from shared 

stimulus -locked listener responses, consistent with prior work on temporally lagged 

speaker -listener coupling during natural communication. 47 

Reference 

Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., 

Altenschmidt, J., Altman, S., & Anadkat, S. (2023). Gpt -4 technical report. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774 .

Antonello, R., Vaidya, A., & Huth, A. (2023). Scaling laws for language encoding 

models in fMRI. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36 ,

21895 –21907. 

Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annu. Rev. Psychol. , 59 (1), 617 –645. 

Benjamini, Y., & Hochberg, Y. (1995). Controlling the false discovery rate: a practical 

and powerful approach to multiple testing. Journal of the Royal statistical 

society: series B (Methodological) , 57 (1), 289 –300. 

Binder, J. R., Conant, L. L., Humphries, C. J., Fernandino, L., Simons, S. B., Aguilar, 

M., & Desai, R. H. (2016). Toward a brain -based componential semantic 

representation. Cognitive Neuropsychology , 33 (3 -4), 130 –174. 

Binder, J. R., Desai, R. H., Graves, W. W., & Conant, L. L. (2009). Where is the 

semantic system? A critical review and meta -analysis of 120 functional 

neuroimaging studies. Cerebral cortex , 19 (12), 2767 –2796. 

Binney, R. J., & Ramsey, R. (2020). Social Semantics: The role of conceptual 

knowledge and cognitive control in a neurobiological model of the social brain. 

Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , 112 , 28 –38. 

Boersma, P. (2011). Praat: doing phonetics by computer [Computer program]. 

http://www . praat. org/ .

Bonnasse -Gahot, L., & Pallier, C. (2024). fMRI predictors based on language models 

of increasing complexity recover brain left lateralization. Advances in Neural 

Information Processing Systems , 37 , 125231 –125263. 

Brothers, L. (1990). The neural basis of primate social communication. Motivation and 

emotion , 14 (2), 81 –91. 

Caucheteux, C., Gramfort, A., & King, J. -R. (2023). Evidence of a predictive coding 

hierarchy in the human brain listening to speech. Nature human behaviour , 7(3), 

430 –441. 

Chang, C. H., Nastase, S. A., Zadbood, A., & Hasson, U. (2024). How a speaker herds 

the audience: multibrain neural convergence over time during naturalistic 

storytelling. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 19 (1), nsae059. 

Chen, Y. -P., Schmidt, F., Keitel, A., Rösch, S., Hauswald, A., & Weisz, N. (2023). 

Speech intelligibility changes the temporal evolution of neural speech tracking. 

neuroimage , 268 , 119894. 

Choi, M., Pei, J., Kumar, S., Shu, C., & Jurgens, D. (2023). Do llms understand social 

knowledge? evaluating the sociability of large language models with socket 

benchmark. Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in 

natural language process ing, 

Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language . Cambridge university press. 

Cogan, G. B., & Poeppel, D. (2011). A mutual information analysis of neural coding of 

speech by low -frequency MEG phase information. Journal of neurophysiology ,

106 (2), 554 –563. 

Collins, A. M., & Quillian, M. R. (1969). Retrieval time from semantic memory. 

Journal of verbal learning and verbal behavior , 8(2), 240 –247. 

Crosse, M. J., Di Liberto, G. M., Bednar, A., & Lalor, E. C. (2016). The Multivariate 

Temporal Response Function (mTRF) Toolbox: A MATLAB Toolbox for 

Relating Neural Signals to Continuous Stimuli [Methods]. Frontiers in Human 

Neuroscience , Volume 10 - 2016 . https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00604 48 

Dale, A. M., Liu, A. K., Fischl, B. R., Buckner, R. L., Belliveau, J. W., Lewine, J. D., 

& Halgren, E. (2000). Dynamic Statistical Parametric Mapping: Combining 

fMRI and MEG for High -Resolution Imaging of Cortical Activity. Neuron ,

26 (1), 55 –67. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896 -6273(00)81138 -1

Du, C., Fu, K., Wen, B., Sun, Y., Peng, J., Wei, W., Gao, Y., Wang, S., Zhang, C., & 

Li, J. (2025). Human -like object concept representations emerge naturally in 

multimodal large language models. Nature Machine Intelligence , 7(6), 860 –875. 

Dunbar, R. I. (1998). The social brain hypothesis. Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, 

News, and Reviews: Issues, News, and Reviews , 6(5), 178 –190. 

Dunbar, R. I., Marriott, A., & Duncan, N. D. (1997). Human conversational behavior. 

Human nature , 8(3), 231 –246. 

Fairhall, S. L., & Caramazza, A. (2013). Brain regions that represent amodal conceptual 

knowledge. Journal of Neuroscience , 33 (25), 10552 –10558. 

Friederici, A. D. (2011). The brain basis of language processing: from structure to 

function. Physiological reviews , 91 (4), 1357 –1392. 

Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical transactions of the 

Royal Society B: Biological sciences , 360 (1456), 815 –836. 

Frith, U., & Frith, C. (2010). The social brain: allowing humans to boldly go where no 

other species has been. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society B: 

Biological sciences , 365 (1537), 165 –176. 

Fuchs, M., Kastner, J., Wagner, M., Hawes, S., & Ebersole, J. S. (2002). A standardized 

boundary element method volume conductor model. Clinical neurophysiology ,

113 (5), 702 –712. 

Gallese, V., & Lakoff, G. (2005). The brain's concepts: The role of the sensory -motor 

system in conceptual knowledge. Cognitive neuropsychology , 22 (3 -4), 455 –479. 

Gao, C., Ma, Z., Chen, J., Li, P., Huang, S., & Li, J. (2025). Increasing alignment of 

large language models with language processing in the human brain. Nature 

computational science , 5(11), 1080 –1090. 

Gramfort, A., Luessi, M., Larson, E., Engemann, D. A., Strohmeier, D., Brodbeck, C., 

Parkkonen, L., & Hämäläinen, M. S. (2014). MNE software for processing 

MEG and EEG data. NeuroImage , 86 , 446 –460. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.027 

Gurnee, W., & Tegmark, M. (2024). Language models represent space and time. 

International Conference on Learning Representations, 

Hari, R., & Kujala, M. V. (2009). Brain basis of human social interaction: from 

concepts to brain imaging. Physiological reviews .

Hasson, U., Ghazanfar, A. A., Galantucci, B., Garrod, S., & Keysers, C. (2012). Brain -

to -brain coupling: a mechanism for creating and sharing a social world. Trends 

in cognitive sciences , 16 (2), 114 –121. 

Hasson, U., Nir, Y., Levy, I., Fuhrmann, G., & Malach, R. (2004). Intersubject 

synchronization of cortical activity during natural vision. Science , 303 (5664), 

1634 –1640. 

Hauptman, M., & Bedny, M. (2025). Animacy semantic network supports causal 

inferences about illness. Elife , 13 , RP101944. 

Hickok, G. (2012). Computational neuroanatomy of speech production. Nature reviews 

neuroscience , 13 (2), 135 –145. 

Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2007). The cortical organization of speech processing. 

Nature reviews neuroscience , 8(5), 393 –402. 

Hong, C., Teng, X., Li, Y., Hsu, S. -M., Tsao, F. -M., Wong, P. C., & Feng, G. (2026). 

Language -specific Tonal Features Drive Speaker -Listener Neural 49 

Synchronization. Journal of Neuroscience .

Huth, A. G., De Heer, W. A., Griffiths, T. L., Theunissen, F. E., & Gallant, J. L. (2016). 

Natural speech reveals the semantic maps that tile human cerebral cortex. 

Nature , 532 (7600), 453 –458. 

Huth, A. G., Nishimoto, S., Vu, A. T., & Gallant, J. L. (2012). A continuous semantic 

space describes the representation of thousands of object and action categories 

across the human brain. Neuron , 76 (6), 1210 –1224. 

Jiang, J., Dai, B., Peng, D., Zhu, C., Liu, L., & Lu, C. (2012). Neural synchronization 

during face -to -face communication. Journal of Neuroscience , 32 (45), 16064 –

16069. 

Jiang, J., Zheng, L., & Lu, C. (2021). A hierarchical model for interpersonal verbal 

communication. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 16 (1 -2), 246 –

255. 

Jozwik, K. M., Najarro, E., Van Den Bosch, J. J., Charest, I., Cichy, R. M., & 

Kriegeskorte, N. (2022). Disentangling five dimensions of animacy in human 

brain and behaviour. Communications Biology , 5(1), 1247. 

Jung -Beeman, M. (2005). Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural language. 

Trends in cognitive sciences , 9(11), 512 –518. 

Karunathilake, I. D., Kulasingham, J. P., & Simon, J. Z. (2023). Neural tracking 

measures of speech intelligibility: Manipulating intelligibility while keeping 

acoustics unchanged. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,

120 (49), e2309166120. 

Kello, C. T., Bruna, P., & Thao, K. (2025). Contextual assembly of lexical functions in 

large language models. Behavior Research Methods , 58 (1), 19. 

Kendall, D. G. (1989). A survey of the statistical theory of shape. Statistical Science ,

4(2), 87 –99. 

Koolagudi, S. G., & Rao, K. S. (2012). Emotion recognition from speech: a review. 

International journal of speech technology , 15 (2), 99 –117. 

Kousta, S. -T., Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Andrews, M., & Del Campo, E. (2011). 

The representation of abstract words: why emotion matters. Journal of 

Experimental Psychology: General , 140 (1), 14. 

Kriegeskorte, N., Mur, M., & Bandettini, P. A. (2008). Representational similarity 

analysis -connecting the branches of systems neuroscience. Frontiers in systems 

neuroscience , 2, 249. 

Kuhlen, A. K., Allefeld, C., & Haynes, J. -D. (2012). Content -specific coordination of 

listeners' to speakers' EEG during communication. Frontiers in human 

neuroscience , 6, 266. 

Lewis, A. G., Wang, L., & Bastiaansen, M. (2015). Fast oscillatory dynamics during 

language comprehension: Unification versus maintenance and prediction? 

Brain and Language , 148 , 51 –63. 

Li, Z., Hong, B., Nolte, G., Engel, A. K., & Zhang, D. (2024). Speaker –listener neural 

coupling correlates with semantic and acoustic features of naturalistic speech. 

Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 19 (1), nsae051. 

Liu, A., Feng, B., Xue, B., Wang, B., Wu, B., Lu, C., Zhao, C., Deng, C., Zhang, C., & 

Ruan, C. (2024). Deepseek -v3 technical report. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2412.19437 .

Liu, L., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Q., Garrett, D. D., Lu, C., Chen, A., Qiu, J., & Ding, G. (2020). 

Auditory –articulatory neural alignment between listener and speaker during 

verbal communication. Cerebral cortex , 30 (3), 942 –951. 

Martin, A. (2007). The representation of object concepts in the brain. Annu. Rev. 50 

Psychol. , 58 (1), 25 –45. 

Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Efficient estimation of word 

representations in vector space. arXiv preprint arXiv:1301.3781 .

Montague, P. R., Berns, G. S., Cohen, J. D., McClure, S. M., Pagnoni, G., Dhamala, 

M., Wiest, M. C., Karpov, I., King, R. D., & Apple, N. (2002). Hyperscanning: 

simultaneous fMRI during linked social interactions. In (Vol. 16, pp. 1159 –

1164): Academic Pres s. 

Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. 

Behavioral and brain sciences , 27 (2), 169 –190. 

Pickering, M. J., & Garrod, S. (2013). An integrated theory of language production and 

comprehension. Behavioral and brain sciences , 36 (4), 329 –347. 

Prichard, D., & Theiler, J. (1994). Generating surrogate data for time series with several 

simultaneously measured variables. Physical review letters , 73 (7), 951. 

Pulvermüller, F. (2005). Brain mechanisms linking language and action. Nature 

reviews neuroscience , 6(7), 576 –582. 

Pulvermüller, F., & Fadiga, L. (2010). Active perception: sensorimotor circuits as a 

cortical basis for language. Nature reviews neuroscience , 11 (5), 351 –360. 

Radvansky, G. A., & Zacks, J. M. (2014). Event cognition . Oxford University Press. 

Saxe, R., & Kanwisher, N. (2003). People thinking about thinking people: The role of 

the temporo -parietal junction in “theory of mind”. neuroimage , 19 (4), 1835 –

1842. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S1053 -8119(03)00230 -1

Schaefer, A., Kong, R., Gordon, E. M., Laumann, T. O., Zuo, X. -N., Holmes, A. J., 

Eickhoff, S. B., & Yeo, B. T. (2018). Local -global parcellation of the human 

cerebral cortex from intrinsic functional connectivity MRI. Cerebral cortex ,

28 (9), 3095 –3114. 

Scherer, K. R. (2003). Vocal communication of emotion: A review of research 

paradigms. Speech communication , 40 (1 -2), 227 –256. 

Singh, M., Cambronero, J., Gulwani, S., Le, V., Negreanu, C., & Verbruggen, G. (2023). 

Codefusion: A pre -trained diffusion model for code generation. Proceedings of 

the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 

Stephens, G. J., Silbert, L. J., & Hasson, U. (2010). Speaker –listener neural coupling 

underlies successful communication. Proceedings of the National Academy of 

Sciences , 107 (32), 14425 –14430. 

Strachan, J. W., Albergo, D., Borghini, G., Pansardi, O., Scaliti, E., Gupta, S., Saxena, 

K., Rufo, A., Panzeri, S., & Manzi, G. (2024). Testing theory of mind in large 

language models and humans. Nature human behaviour , 8(7), 1285 –1295. 

Tezcan, F., Weissbart, H., & Martin, A. E. (2023). A tradeoff between acoustic and 

linguistic feature encoding in spoken language comprehension. Elife , 12 ,

e82386. 

Thye, M., Hoffman, P., & Mirman, D. (2024). The neural basis of naturalistic semantic 

and social cognition. Scientific reports , 14 (1), 6796. 

Váša, F., & Mišić, B. (2022). Null models in network neuroscience. Nature reviews 

neuroscience , 23 (8), 493 –504. 

Vigário, R., Sarela, J., Jousmiki, V., Hamalainen, M., & Oja, E. (2002). Independent 

component approach to the analysis of EEG and MEG recordings. IEEE 

transactions on biomedical engineering , 47 (5), 589 –593. 

Vigliocco, G., Kousta, S. -T., Della Rosa, P. A., Vinson, D. P., Tettamanti, M., Devlin, 

J. T., & Cappa, S. F. (2014). The neural representation of abstract words: the 

role of emotion. Cerebral cortex , 24 (7), 1767 –1777. 

Vigliocco, G., Vinson, D. P., Druks, J., Barber, H., & Cappa, S. F. (2011). Nouns and 51 

verbs in the brain: A review of behavioural, electrophysiological, 

neuropsychological and imaging studies. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 

Reviews , 35 (3), 407 –426. 

Winkler, I., Debener, S., Müller, K. -R., & Tangermann, M. (2015). On the influence of 

high -pass filtering on ICA -based artifact reduction in EEG -ERP. 2015 37th 

annual international conference of the IEEE engineering in medicine and 

biology society (EMBC), 

Xu, Q., Peng, Y., Nastase, S. A., Chodorow, M., Wu, M., & Li, P. (2025). Large 

language models without grounding recover non -sensorimotor but not 

sensorimotor features of human concepts. Nature human behaviour , 1 –16. 

Zada, Z., Goldstein, A., Michelmann, S., Simony, E., Price, A., Hasenfratz, L., Barham, 

E., Zadbood, A., Doyle, W., & Friedman, D. (2024). A shared model -based 

linguistic space for transmitting our thoughts from brain to brain in natural 

conversations. Neuron , 112 (18), 3211 –3222. e3215. 

Zada, Z., Nastase, S. A., Speer, S., Mwilambwe -Tshilobo, L., Tsoi, L., Burns, S. M., 

Falk, E., Hasson, U., & Tamir, D. I. (2026). Linguistic coupling between neural 

systems for speech production and comprehension during real -time dyadic 

conversations. Neuron , 114 (4), 774 –787. e775. 

Zwaan, R. A., & Radvansky, G. A. (1998). Situation models in language 

comprehension and memory. Psychological bulletin , 123 (2), 162.