Title: AdaptICA: Data-Adaptive Transformation Learning for Independent Component Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.21901v1

Published Time: Mon, 27 Jul 2026 00:24:26 GMT

Number of Pages: 36

Markdown Content:
# AdaptICA: Data-Adaptive Transformation Learning for Independent Component Analysis 

# Lida Jalili 1, Jingyu Liu 2, Vince D. Calhoun 3, Li-Hsiang Lin 1∗

1Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, United States 

2Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, United States 

3Tri-institutional Center for Translational Research in Neuroimaging and Data Science, Georgia State University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30303, United States 

∗Corresponding Author: lhlin @gsu.edu 

# July 27, 2026 

Abstract 

Independent component analysis (ICA) is widely used to recover latent structure from signal and imaging data, but standard ICA assumes that the observed measure-ment scale preserves a linear mixing structure. This assumption may fail for fea-tures produced through nonlinear preprocessing, such as band-specific power in motor-imagery EEG. We propose AdaptICA, an adaptive transformation-based framework that jointly learns grouped componentwise transformations and the demixing struc-ture using a profiled mutual-information criterion. Because the transformation and demixing parameters may compensate for one another, their joint estimation intro-duces new identifiability and asymptotic challenges. We establish identifiability, con-sistency, and asymptotic normality of the transformation estimator, together with joint strong consistency of the transformation and demixing estimators. AdaptICA selects the transformation structure data-adaptively and includes the identity transformation as a candidate, thereby reducing to standard ICA when no scale adjustment is needed. Extensive simulations support the theoretical results. Applications demonstrate that AdaptICA can recover more independent and interpretable sources when transforma-tion is beneficial while retaining standard ICA when the original measurement scale is adequate. 

key words: Biomedical signal processing, Blind source separation, Neuroimaging, Box-Cox transformation, Nonlinear distortion arXiv:2607.21901v1 [stat.ME] 24 Jul 2026 1 Introduction 

Independent component analysis (ICA) is a fundamental method for unsupervised represen-tation learning and blind source separation in machine learning, statistics, signal processing, and data science [Comon, 1994, Cardoso, 1999, Hyv¨ arinen and Oja, 2000, Lee et al., 2003, Cardoso, 2003]. By representing multivariate observations through statistically independent latent components, ICA and its extensions support feature extraction, dimension reduction, denoising, latent-structure discovery, and downstream learning [Hyv¨ arinen, 1999, Cardoso and Souloumiac, 1993, Bell and Sejnowski, 1995, Hyv¨ arinen et al., 2001, Bach and Jordan, 2003, Learned-Miller and Fisher, 2003, Matteson and Tsay, 2017, S¨ arel¨ a and Vig´ ario, 2003, S¨ arel¨ a and Valpola, 2005, Pfister et al., 2019, Sasaki and Takenouchi, 2022]. Its identifiabil-ity, estimation, and asymptotic properties have also been developed through M-estimation and semiparametric theory [Chen and Bickel, 2006, 2008, Ilmonen and Paindaveine, 2011, Virta et al., 2016]. These capabilities are particularly relevant to neuroimaging, where mea-surements from many sensors or spatial locations contain overlapping contributions from latent neural activity, physiological artifacts, and measurement noise. Accordingly, ICA is routinely used to remove artifacts, identify functional networks, and construct interpretable representations from EEG, MEG, and fMRI data [Makeig et al., 1996, Vig´ ario et al., 2000, Calhoun et al., 2001, Beckmann and Smith, 2004, Calhoun et al., 2009], with related appli-cations in other high-dimensional imaging problems [Nascimento and Bioucas-Dias, 2005]. Given this broad use, it is important to determine whether the analyzed data representation preserves the linear mixing structure on which ICA depends. This requirement can be difficult to verify because ICA is often applied to derived features 1rather than directly to the original sensor measurements, and nonlinear feature construction may alter the underlying mixture structure. Our motivating example is motor-imagery EEG, where physiologically meaningful mu-band power is obtained by filtering, squaring, and averaging sensor-level voltages [Pfurtscheller and Da Silva, 1999]. Because these nonlinear operations are applied after the latent neural signals have been mixed at the scalp sensors, the resulting power variables need not satisfy the linear representation assumed by standard ICA. The observed dependence structure may be further affected by physical mechanisms such as volume conduction and field spread [Nunez and Srinivasan, 2006, H¨ am¨ al¨ ainen et al., 1993, Ilmoniemi et al., 2019]. A common practice is to apply a fixed logarithmic, square-root, or other transformation before ICA, typically using the same transformation for all variables and selecting it independently of the source-separation objective. Such preprocessing does not determine whether the selected transformation improves the independence of the recovered latent components. Learning transformations within ICA creates additional statistical and methodological challenges. The transformation and demixing parameters may compensate for one another, so identifiability of the standard ICA model does not automatically extend to the enlarged model. Moreover, because both sets of parameters are estimated from the same data, consis-tency of the transformation estimator alone does not guarantee consistency of the recovered demixing structure, and the usual asymptotic theory for ICA cannot be applied without further justification. Classical transformation methods primarily target marginal normality, variance stabilization, probability coherence, or regression additivity [Box and Cox, 1964, Dobson and Barnett, 2018, Lin and Joseph, 2020], rather than independence of latent com-ponents. General nonlinear and post-nonlinear ICA models provide greater flexibility [Taleb 2and Jutten, 1999, Jutten and Karhunen, 2003, Harmeling et al., 2003], but they are typically non-identifiable without additional structural, temporal, or auxiliary information [Kagan et al., 1973, Sasaki and Takenouchi, 2022]. A systematic framework is therefore needed to learn transformations according to the ICA objective while retaining identifiability, tractable estimation, joint consistency, and valid asymptotic inference. Motivated by this phenomenon observed in the motor-imagery EEG application, we pro-pose adaptive transformation-based independent component analysis (AdaptICA), a frame-work that learns an appropriate measurement scale through grouped componentwise trans-formations selected by a profiled mutual-information criterion. Grouping allows related vari-ables to share information while accommodating heterogeneous distortions across groups. The identity transformation is included in the model class, so standard ICA is retained when no scale adjustment is supported by the data. We establish identifiability of the trans-formation parameter, consistency and √n-asymptotic normality of its estimator, an oracle property for the demixing estimator, and joint almost-sure consistency of the transformation and demixing estimators. Thus, AdaptICA provides a unified extension of linear ICA that uses the independence objective itself to determine whether and how the measurement scale should be transformed, without sacrificing the interpretability and computational structure of standard ICA. Beyond neuroimaging, the proposed framework is applicable whenever ICA is used as an intermediate representation for denoising, feature extraction, clustering, visualization, prediction, or latent-pattern discovery. By combining transformation learning with an independence-based objective, AdaptICA broadens the use of ICA to multivariate data whose analyzed scale is affected by nonlinear preprocessing, feature construction, or un-3known componentwise distortions, while preserving standard ICA for datasets that remain adequately linear on their original measurement scale. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the AdaptICA model and estimation procedure. Section 3 presents the identifiability and asymptotic re-sults. Section 4 reports the simulation studies, and Section 5 presents the EEG and MEG applications. Concluding remarks and directions for future research are provided in the final section, with proofs, additional simulations, and detailed real-data analyses included in the Supplemental Material. 

# 2 Methodology 

Let X ∈ Rn×T denote the observed data matrix, where the i-th row xi ∈ RT represents one observation measured over T variables, such as sensor channels. In classical ICA, each observation is assumed to follow the linear mixing model 

xi = As i, i = 1 , . . . , n, 

where A ∈ RT ×T is an invertible mixing matrix and si ∈ RT is a latent source vector with mutually independent components. Under standard ICA assumptions, the latent sources are identifiable up to permutation and scaling. In many applications, however, the observed variables are additionally subject to unknown componentwise nonlinear distortions, so direct application of the ICA may fail to recover the underlying independent structure. Our goal is therefore to recover the latent independent components while accommodating such nonlinear 4effects through a structured parametric transformation. To address this issue, we introduce an invertible componentwise transformation Tλ :

RT → RT applied to each observed vector. At the population level, we assume that the observed random vector x follows the transformation-based ICA model 

x = T −1 

> λ0

(A0s), (1) where λ0 ∈ Λ ⊂ RK is the true transformation parameter, A0 ∈ RT ×T is an invertible mixing matrix, and s = ( s1, . . . , s T )⊤ has mutually independent components. Equivalently, applying the true transformation yields the linear ICA representation Tλ0 (x) = A0s. Thus, Tλ re-moves componentwise nonlinear distortion so that ICA can be performed on a measurement scale that better preserves a linearly separable latent structure. Although this formulation accommodates a general class of invertible transformations, for illustration and theoretical development we adopt grouped parametric transformations based on the Box–Cox family [Box and Cox, 1964], which provides a parsimonious and interpretable specification while allowing related variables to share transformation parameters. This parametric choice is not essential to the general AdaptICA principle; more flexible nonparametric specifications, such as constrained monotone spline transformations [Ramsay, 1988], can be incorporated. For the observed data matrix X, let xij denote the j-th component of xi, for i = 1 , . . . , n 

and j = 1 , . . . , T . Rather than assigning a separate transformation parameter to each variable, we allow variables to share parameters through a grouped structure. Specifically, we partition the T variables into K groups G1, . . . , G K , with typically K ≤ T , and let 

G(j) ∈ { 1, . . . , K } denote the group index of variable j. We then define the transformation 5parameter vector λ = ( λ1, . . . , λ K )⊤ ∈ Λ, where Λ is a compact parameter space, for example Λ = [ −2, 2] K for numerical stability. This grouped parameterization reduces the transfor-mation dimension from T to K, thereby improving parsimony and estimation stability. It is particularly natural in neuroimaging applications, where observed variables such as EEG channels may be organized into anatomically or functionally related regions and are there-fore expected to share similar nonlinear distortion patterns. As a concrete parametric family, we adopt the grouped Box–Cox transformation for demonstration. For each observation xi,define zi = Tλ(xi), whose j-th component is 

zij = TλG(j) (xij ) = 



(xλG(j) 

> ij

− 1) /λ G(j), λG(j)̸ = 0 ,

log xij , λG(j) = 0 ,i = 1 , . . . , n, j = 1 , . . . , T. (2) The corresponding inverse transformation is 

T −1 

> λ

(z) = 



(λz + 1) 1/λ , λ̸ = 0 ,

exp( z), λ = 0 .

(3) The parameter dimension K carries significant practical implications for the model’s inter-pretability and statistical performance. Rather than assuming independent transformations for every variable, we leverage the underlying structural properties of the data to group related sensors. For instance, in our Section 5.1 analysis of EEG medical imaging data, the 

T = 22 individual channels are concisely represented by K = 10 parameters corresponding to distinct anatomical regions. By adopting this grouped configuration, the model achieves a 6more robust estimation of latent brain activity. This approach effectively exploits the spatial dependencies inherent in sensor locations, reducing the risk of overfitting while ensuring that the learned transformations align with known neurophysiological boundaries. The fundamental premise is that, for an appropriate choice of λ, each transformed obser-vation vector zi admits an approximately linear ICA representation. Given the transformed observations zi = Tλ(xi), we consider a linear demixing matrix W ∈ RT ×T and define the candidate components: 

ui = Wz i = WTλ(xi), i = 1 , . . . , n, (4) where ui = ( ui1, . . . , u iT )⊤ approximates the latent sources si. We quantify independence through mutual information (MI). Let fu denote the joint probability density function (pdf) of the random vector u, and let fuj denote the marginal pdf of its j-th component. The mutual information is MI( u) = 

Z

> RT

fu(u) log 

(

fu(u)

QTj=1 fuj (uj )

)

du = DKL fu

> T

Y

> j=1

fuj

!

, (5) where DKL (·∥· ) denotes the Kullback–Leibler divergence. Since MI( u) = 0 if and only if the components of u are mutually independent, minimizing mutual information provides a natural criterion for recovering independent sources. At the population level, for transformed observations ui = WTλ(xi), we may view the target criterion as MI( WTλ(x)) , that is, the mutual information of the random vector ob-tained after applying the componentwise transformation and the linear demixing matrix. 7Joint optimization over ( W, λ) is challenging because the problem is nonconvex and be-cause the transformation and demixing parameters interact in a highly nonlinear way. We therefore adopt a profiled two-step strategy. Specifically, for any fixed λ ∈ Λ, define the profiled population objective 

g(λ) = inf  

> W

MI( WTλ(x)) , (6) which represents the smallest population dependence that can be achieved after optimally demixing the transformed data. Under the true transformation λ0, the transformed vector 

Tλ0 (x) follows a linear ICA model, so the population minimum is attained at zero up to the usual ICA indeterminacies. Hence g(λ) serves as the criterion for selecting the transforma-tion parameter. In practice, however, the population mutual information in (6) is unknown because it depends on the joint and marginal densities of the latent demixed vector. We therefore replace g(λ) by a computable sample criterion bgn(λ), which we refer to as an em-pirical proxy for the profiled mutual information. Concretely, for each candidate λ, we first transform the observed sample to obtain zi = Tλ(xi), apply an ICA routine to the trans-formed data to obtain a demixing estimate cW(λ), and then evaluate a sample measure of residual dependence among the recovered components bui(λ) = cW(λ)Tλ(xi), i = 1 , . . . , n. 

Thus, bgn(λ) = dDep n(bu1(λ), . . . , bun(λ)) , where dDep n denotes a sample dependence measure chosen to approximate mutual information or, more generally, to rank candidate transforma-tions according to how close the recovered components are to independence. For example, 

dDep n may be implemented using the empirical ICA contrast returned by FastICA, a non-parametric mutual information estimator, or another dependence criterion such as distance 8covariance. The essential requirement for the theory is that bgn(λ) converges uniformly to 

g(λ) over Λ. We then estimate the transformation parameter by minimizing this sample criterion: 

bλ = arg min  

> λ∈Λ

bgn(λ). (7) In this way, Stage 1 selects the transformation that makes the data as close as possible to admitting a linearly separable ICA representation. Given ˆλ in (7), Stage 2 extracts the final sources: 

u∗ 

> i

= W∗Tˆλ(xi), i = 1 , . . . , n. (8) We use FastICA in the final stage for efficiency and stability. The number of groups K is chosen by the same profiled dependence criterion that defines the transformation estimator in (7). Each candidate value of K specifies a grouped parameterization λ ∈ RK , and for that grouping we obtain bλ(K) = arg min λ∈Λ bgn(λ) with the associated criterion value 

bgn(bλ(K)). We consider a nested family of anatomically defined groupings, ranging from a single common transformation ( K = 1) through region- and hemisphere-based partitions to a separate transformation for each channel ( K = T ), and select 

bK = arg min  

> K

bgn

bλ(K)



.

Because bgn is the same profiled mutual-information proxy used in (7), selecting K requires no additional criterion. As an independent check that is not used in estimation or selection, we also report the distance correlation among the recovered components at the selected grouping; 9its reduction relative to standard ICA confirms that the improvement is not an artifact of the mutual-information objective. The overall procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Transformation-based Independent Component Analysis  

> 1:

Input: Data matrix X ∈ Rn×T ; search set Λ; transformation Tλ; dependence criterion 

bgn; Stage 1 unmixing routine A; candidate group counts K with a grouping map for each 

K ∈ K . 

> 2:

Stage 1 (Profiled transformation and group selection):  

> 3:

for each candidate K ∈ K do  

> 4:

Form the grouped parameterization λ ∈ RK . 

> 5:

Compute bλ(K) = arg min λ∈Λ bgn(λ) by transforming the data zi = Tλ(xi), applying 

A, and evaluating bgn(λ) = dDep n( bU(λ)).  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Select bK = arg min K∈K bgn(bλ(K)) and set ˆλ = bλ( bK).  

> 8:

Stage 2 (Final demixing and sources): Form Z∗ ∈ Rn×T using ˆλ. Apply FastICA to Z∗ to obtain W∗ and source matrix U∗ ∈ Rn×T as in (8); report bA = ( W∗)−1. 

> 9:

Output: ˆλ, source matrix U∗, and bA.Algorithm 1 allows different unmixing routines in Stage 1, and our simulation studies examine several Stage 1 alternatives to evaluate their impact on transformation learning. In practice, we suggest using FastICA in both Stage 1 and Stage 2; under this choice, Stage 2 is in principle computationally redundant because Stage 1 already provides a demixing es-timate at the selected ˆλ. We nevertheless retain the explicit two-stage formulation for two reasons. First, it underscores the modular design of the method: Stage 1 is used only to select the transformation via a profiled dependence criterion and is not tied to any particu-lar ICA solver, whereas Stage 2 performs final source extraction with a preferred algorithm. Second, this separation makes the profile structure transparent, which is essential for the identifiability, consistency, and oracle-property arguments developed in the theoretical sec-tion. 10 3 Theoretical results 

Section 2 introduces the profiled mutual-information criterion for selecting the transforma-tion parameter and the subsequent ICA step for final source recovery. The main theoretical questions are whether the transformation parameter is identifiable from the population cri-terion, whether the empirical Stage 1 minimizer is consistent and efficient, and whether the final demixing step behaves asymptotically as if the true transformation were known. This section addresses these questions and provides the justification for the two-step procedure in Algorithm 1. We assume that the data follow the transformation-based ICA model described in Sec-tion 2, with true transformation parameter λ0, invertible mixing matrix A0, and latent source vector s whose components are mutually independent, with at most one Gaussian compo-nent. Throughout, the Box–Cox transformation, its inverse, the transformed variables, the profiled population objective g(λ), and the estimator bλn are defined as in Section 2. The final demixing matrix is obtained by applying ICA to the sample transformed at bλn.The first result establishes that the true transformation parameter λ0 is uniquely identi-fied by the population profiled criterion g(λ). This provides the key well-posedness property for Stage 1: minimizing the profiled criterion targets a unique population quantity rather than an ambiguous equivalence class. The argument combines the invertibility of the trans-formation family with the classical ICA identifiability result, and the proof is deferred to Appendix B of Supplemental Material. 

Theorem 1 (Identifiability of the transformation parameter) . Assume the model (1) and the conditions in Appendix A of Supplemental Material. Then the profiled population objective 11 g(λ) in (6) satisfies 

g(λ) ≥ 0 for all λ ∈ Λ, g(λ0) = 0 , inf  

> λ∈Λ: λ̸=λ0

g(λ) > 0. (9) Consequently, λ0 is the unique global minimizer of g(λ) over Λ. The detailed proof of Theorem 1 is given in Appendix B of Supplemental Material. Theo-rem 1 implies that Stage 1 targets a unique population parameter: any misspecified transfor-mation λ̸ = λ0 leaves residual dependence that cannot be removed by linear demixing, and this residual dependence is captured by the strict positivity in (9). The role of invertibility is crucial here: because Tλ is one-to-one on the support, the only way to achieve mutual information zero after demixing is to undo the correct componentwise distortion, up to the usual ICA permutation and scaling. Having established identifiability, we turn to the large-sample behavior of the Stage 1 estimator bλn defined in (7). The main technical difficulty is that the empirical objective 

bgn(λ) is itself defined through an inner ICA fit, and thus depends on λ through a data-dependent demixing matrix. The proof strategy is to show that bgn converges uniformly to 

g over Λ, that g is well-separated around its unique minimizer λ0 as in (9), and that g is locally twice differentiable with nondegenerate Hessian at λ0. The required uniformity and smoothness are ensured by the bounded support and regularity conditions in Appendix A of Supplemental Material, and the detailed proof of Theorem 2 is given in Appendix C of Supplemental Material with supporting lemmas and their proof. 

Theorem 2 (Stage 1 consistency and asymptotic normality) . Assume the conditions in 12 Appendix A of Supplemental Material, and let bλn be defined by (7). Then 

bλnP

−→ λ0. (10) If in addition g is twice continuously differentiable in a neighborhood of λ0 and the Hessian 

Hλ = ∇2g(λ0) ∈ RK×K is positive definite, then 

√n (bλn − λ0) d

−→ N  0, H−1 

> λ

VλH−1

> λ

 , (11) where Vλ is the asymptotic covariance of the score associated with the criterion bgn(λ)evaluated at λ0.Theorem 2 justifies optimizing bgn in Stage 1: (10) shows that the empirical minimizer targets the unique population minimizer in (9), while (11) produces a standard √n-rate and a quadratic approximation of the criterion near λ0. Although the inner ICA fit makes bgn non-smooth in finite samples, the regularity conditions ensure that the resulting map λ 7 → bgn(λ)behaves as a regular M-estimation objective in the limit. Finally, we study Stage 2, in which the demixing matrix is estimated from the transformed data at bλn. The main question is whether using bλn instead of the true λ0 affects the first-order asymptotics of the demixing estimator. Since bλn is √n-consistent by (11), it suffices to establish that the FastICA functional is sufficiently regular with respect to small perturbations of the underlying distribution induced by λ. This is achieved by combining continuity properties of Tλ (through (2) and bounded support) with existing asymptotic theory for FastICA under whitening. 13 Theorem 3 (Stage 2 oracle property) . Assume the conditions in Appendix A of Supple-mental Material. Let W0 denote the population demixing matrix corresponding to the transformed model at the true parameter λ0, and let cWn be the Stage 2 demixing estimator computed from {Tbλn (xi)}ni=1 . Then, up to the standard ICA permutation and sign indeter-minacies, cWn is consistent for W0. Moreover, for any fixed row bwn of cWn corresponding to a pre-specified component, 

√n ( bwn − w0) d

−→ N (0, Σw), (12) where w0 is the corresponding row of W0 after appropriate permutation and sign alignment. Importantly, Σw coincides with the asymptotic covariance that would be obtained if the true transformation parameters λ0 were known and ICA were applied directly to the transformed observations {Tλ0 (xi)}ni=1 .A detailed proof of Theorem 3 is provided in Appendix D of Supplemental Material. Theorem 3 establishes an oracle property: replacing the unknown λ0 by its Stage 1 estimate in (8) does not alter the first-order limiting distribution in (12). This formalizes the intuition that Stage 1 learns the transformation sufficiently fast that Stage 2 effectively operates on data transformed as if by the true parameter. In particular, inference for demixing directions can proceed using standard FastICA asymptotic covariance expressions, without additional variance-inflation terms attributable to the preliminary estimation in (7). Beyond these pointwise, first–order results, the two–stage procedure also admits a stronger pathwise guarantee. In particular, under mild strengthening of the regularity conditions used in Theorems 2 and 3, we can upgrade convergence in probability of the transformation pa-rameter and the demixing matrix to joint almost–sure convergence. This yields a global 14 “eventual correctness” result: with probability one, for all sufficiently large sample sizes, the estimated transformation and demixing directions are simultaneously arbitrarily close to their population counterparts, up to the usual ICA permutation and sign indeterminacies. 

Theorem 4 (Joint almost-sure consistency of transformation and demixing) . Assume the regularity conditions in Appendix A of Supplemental Material hold, together with the ad-ditional strong-law and continuity conditions for the Stage 1 criterion and the FastICA functional stated in Assumptions ?? –?? . Let λ0 denote the true transformation parame-ter, and let W0 denote the corresponding population demixing matrix for the transformed model at λ0. Let bλn be the Stage 1 estimator, and let cWn be the Stage 2 FastICA demixing estimator computed from the whitened transformed data {Tbλn (xi)}ni=1 .Then, up to the usual ICA permutation and sign indeterminacies, 

bλn

> a.s.

−−→ λ0, cWn

> a.s.

−−→ W0,

and hence 

 bλn, cWn

 a.s. 

−−→  λ0, W0



jointly, almost surely under the true data-generating process. The detailed proof, which combines almost-sure uniform convergence of the profiled mutual information criterion with a strong-law version of the FastICA asymptotic theory, is given in Appendix E of Supplemental Material. Theorem 4 complements the convergence in probability and asymptotic normality re-sults by providing a pathwise guarantee for the entire two–stage procedure. Almost-sure 15 joint convergence of bλn and cWn is particularly useful for downstream plug–in constructions (e.g., functionals of the recovered sources, iterated procedures, or sequential tuning schemes), where stability along the whole sample path is more natural than statement-by-statement convergence in distribution. In combination, Theorems 1–4 show that the proposed Adap-tICA framework is well-posed at the population level, admits efficient √n-rate estimation for both the transformation and demixing parameters, and enjoys strong almost-sure consistency guarantees for the resulting two-step estimators. 

# 4 Simulation studies 

The simulation studies evaluate the finite-sample implications of the theoretical results in Section 3. Examples 1 and 2 are correctly specified under the transformation-based ICA model in (1) and are used to assess transformation identifiability, Stage 1 estimation, and Stage 2 demixing. Example 3 is a model specification for sensitivity analysis and examines the behavior of AdaptICA when the nonlinear distortions are outside the Box–Cox family. All examples use 300 independent replications with sample size n = 500. For AdaptICA, Stage 1 estimates bλ by minimizing bgn(λ), and Stage 2 applies FastICA to Tbλ(xi), producing 

u∗ 

> i

= W∗Tbλ(xi) and bA = ( W∗)−1. We compare AdaptICA with FastICA, Traditional-BC-FastICA, JADE, and InfoMax. Traditional-BC-FastICA estimates Box–Cox parameters by maximizing marginal Gaussian likelihood, whereas AdaptICA estimates them by minimizing residual dependence after demixing. Performance is evaluated by Lambda-norm, A-norm, and MI. Lambda-norm, ∥bλ − λ0∥,checks transformation recovery and is used to assess Theorems 1 and 2. A-norm, ∥ bAalign −

16 A0∥F /∥A0∥F , checks mixing-matrix recovery and is used to assess Theorem 3. MI measures residual dependence among the recovered components. Additional simulation results are provided in Appendix F of Supplemental Material: Subsection F.1 of Supplemental Mate-rial first presents figures to demonstrate recovered signal-level to complement the numerical summaries in the following main content, comparing the observed mixtures, AdaptICA re-covered components, and true latent sources; Subsection F.2 of Supplemental Material then reports component-wise transformation-parameter summaries for Example 2; and subsection F.3 of Supplemental Material presents an additional sensitivity analysis under misspecified smooth-source nonlinear distortions. 

# 4.1 Example 1: Scalar transformation parameter 

Example 1 considers a scalar Box–Cox transformation shared across all observed variables. The sources are generated as S1 ∼ t(3), S2 ∼ Uniform( −1, 1), and S3 ∼ Bernoulli(0 .5) − 0.5. The true mixing matrix A0 has rows (1 , 2, 3), (2 , 1, 1), and (1 , 3, 1), and the linear reference data are Xlinear = SA ⊤ 

> 0

. In the linear scenario, X = Xlinear , so the target transformation is the identity with λ0 = 1. In the nonlinear scenario, the observed variables are generated from the inverse Box–Cox transformation with common parameter λ0 = 0 .5, after a column-wise shift to satisfy the Box–Cox domain condition. Thus, Example 1 is a correctly specified scalar-transformation setting. Table 1 shows that AdaptICA has smaller Lambda-norm than Traditional-BC-FastICA in both scenarios of Example 1. This supports Theorems 1 and 2: under correct specification, the profiled MI criterion selects a transformation closer to the true parameter than the likelihood-based Box–Cox criterion. The linear scenario also 17 shows that Stage 1 stays close to the identity transformation when no nonlinear correction is needed. Table 1: Transformation-parameter accuracy for AdaptICA and Traditional-BC-FastICA across the three main simulation examples over 300 replications with n = 500. Entries are mean (SD) of Lambda-norm. Smaller values indicate better recovery of the true Box–Cox transformation parameter. An em dash denotes that Lambda-norm is not defined because no true Box–Cox parameter exists in the nonlinear scenario of Example 3. Bold indicates the better value between the two transformation-based methods for each scenario and example.                        

> Scenario Method Example 1 Example 2 Example 3
> Linear AdaptICA 0.197 (0.242) 0.016 (0.056) 0.005 (0.030) Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.546 (0.681) 0.479 (0.532) 0.807 (0.424) Nonlinear AdaptICA 0.088 (0.181) 0.428 (0.288) —Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.418 (0.467) 0.720 (0.755) —

The separation results in Table 2 are consistent with Theorem 3. In the nonlinear sce-nario, the more accurate transformation estimate for AdaptICA is accompanied by the best A-norm and the best MI. This indicates that estimating λ0 through bgn(λ) leads to trans-formed data on which the final ICA step can recover a better demixing structure and more independent components. 

# 4.2 Example 2: Vector transformation parameters 

Example 2 uses the same sources, mixing matrix, and sample size as Example 1, but al-lows a separate Box–Cox transformation parameter for each observed variable. In the linear scenario, the target transformation is λ0 = (1 , 1, 1) ⊤. In the nonlinear scenario, the true transformation parameter is λ0 = (0 .5, 1.0, 1.5) ⊤. After forming Xlinear = SA ⊤ 

> 0

, each ob-served variable is transformed using its own inverse Box–Cox parameter. This example checks whether Stage 1 can identify heterogeneous transformation parameters. Additional component-wise summaries for the estimated vector-valued transformation parameter are 18 Table 2: Separation performance across the three main simulation examples over 300 replica-tions with n = 500. Lambda-norm is reported separately in Table 1. Entries are mean (SD). Smaller values indicate better performance. Bold indicates the best value in each metric and scenario; when entries are indistinguishable at the reported precision, tied best displayed entries are bolded. Horizontal rules separate the linear and nonlinear scenarios within each example. 

Example Scenario Method A-norm MI 

Example 1: Scalar λ

Linear AdaptICA 0.068 (0.053) 0.155 (0.068) FastICA 0.045 (0.019) 0.180 (0.077) Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.251 (0.224) 0.244 (0.056) JADE 0.083 (0.040) 0.323 (0.105) InfoMax 0.046 (0.020) 0.148 (0.065) Nonlinear AdaptICA 0.065 (0.083) 0.153 (0.064) FastICA 0.207 (0.049) 0.370 (0.062) Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.257 (0.216) 0.264 (0.061) JADE 0.261 (0.088) 0.397 (0.078) InfoMax 0.206 (0.048) 0.368 (0.061) Example 2: Vector λ

Linear AdaptICA 0.044 (0.021) 0.171 (0.076) FastICA 0.044 (0.021) 0.175 (0.079) Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.046 (0.022) 0.237 (0.059) JADE 0.089 (0.038) 0.326 (0.109) InfoMax 0.044 (0.022) 0.143 (0.068) Nonlinear AdaptICA 0.075 (0.092) 0.217 (0.075) FastICA 0.237 (0.149) 0.332 (0.078) Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.047 (0.022) 0.256 (0.068) JADE 0.389 (0.111) 0.360 (0.100) InfoMax 0.227 (0.138) 0.342 (0.076) Example 3: Model specification Linear AdaptICA 0.189 (0.094) 0.255 (0.023) FastICA 0.186 (0.087) 0.256 (0.022) Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.338 (0.141) 0.251 (0.028) JADE 0.159 (0.067) 0.255 (0.022) InfoMax 0.186 (0.091) 0.259 (0.023) Nonlinear AdaptICA 0.457 (0.132) 0.144 (0.044) FastICA 0.459 (0.135) 0.200 (0.033) Traditional-BC-FastICA 0.488 (0.130) 0.219 (0.028) JADE 0.443 (0.131) 0.216 (0.035) InfoMax 0.459 (0.134) 0.204 (0.033) 

reported in Section ?? .The Lambda-norm results in Table 1 favor AdaptICA in both scenarios, extending the empirical support for Theorems 1 and 2 from a scalar transformation to a vector-valued transformation. This result also reflects the difference between the two transformation cri-19 teria: Traditional-BC-FastICA targets marginal Gaussianity, while AdaptICA targets inde-pendence after demixing. Table 2 shows that AdaptICA gives the smallest MI in the nonlinear scenario. Traditional-BC-FastICA gives the smallest A-norm in this setting, but its Lambda-norm and MI are larger than those of AdaptICA. Thus, the results support the role of bgn(λ) as a profiled dependence criterion for transformation selection. A representative signal-level comparison for Example 2 is shown in Appendix F.1 of Supplemental Material. The figure illustrates that, after transformation selection and demixing, the recovered components preserve the main qualitative features of the true sources, including continuous heavy-tailed variation and the discrete switching pattern of the Bernoulli-type source. 

# 4.3 Example 3: Misspecified nonlinear EEG-like setting 

Example 3 is a model-misspecification sensitivity analysis designed to evaluate AdaptICA when the nonlinear distortions are outside the exact Box–Cox transformation family. It differs from Examples 1 and 2 because the nonlinear scenario is outside the exact Box–Cox transformation family. The source processes use autoregressive coefficients ρ = (0 .40 , 0.35 , 0.30 , 0.25). The innovations are ε1(t) ∼ Uniform( −√3, √3), ε2(t) = {χ22(t) − 2}/2, ε3(t) = {χ24(t) −

4}/√8, and ε4(t) ∼ N (0 , 1). Each source is standardized after generation. The mixing matrix A0 ∈ R4×4 has independent standard normal entries in each replication. In the lin-ear scenario, the target transformation is λ0 = (1 , 1, 1, 1) ⊤. In the nonlinear scenario, the observed variables are distorted by signed power, cubic, and signed logarithmic transforma-tions. Since these distortions are not Box–Cox transformations, the nonlinear scenario does 20 not have a true Box–Cox parameter. A related model-specification sensitivity analysis with misspecified smooth-source nonlinear distortions is reported in Section ?? .The linear scenario in Example 3 checks whether Stage 1 stays close to the identity transformation when the identity is appropriate. Table 1 shows that AdaptICA has smaller Lambda-norm than Traditional-BC-FastICA. This supports the stability of the profiled MI criterion, although Example 3 is not part of the correctly specified setting used to verify Theorems 1 and 2. The nonlinear scenario of Example 3 is not a direct check of Theorems 1–4, because the Box–Cox model is misspecified and Lambda-norm is not defined. Table 2 shows that Adap-tICA has A-norm comparable to the competing ICA methods and the smallest MI. Thus, under model misspecification, the transformation step mainly reduces empirical dependence while maintaining similar mixing-matrix recovery. A representative recovered-signal display for this misspecified nonlinear setting is provided in Appendix G.1 of Supplemental Material. Although the fitted Box–Cox family does not coincide with the true nonlinear distortion, the recovered components retain several source-level temporal features, supporting the use of AdaptICA as a dependence-reducing preprocessing and demixing strategy under moderate model misspecification. 

# 5 Real-Data Analyses 

The proposed transformation-based independent component analysis (AdaptICA) frame-work is applied to two real neurophysiological signal datasets. The first analysis consid-ers mu-band power derived from motor-imagery electroencephalography (EEG) in the BCI 21 Competition IV Dataset 2a. This application represents a setting in which a scientifically meaningful nonlinear feature construction changes the measurement scale on which a linear ICA representation is expected to hold. The second analysis considers magnetoencephalog-raphy (MEG) recordings from the MNE sample-data repository. For these data, the identity transformation is selected, demonstrating that AdaptICA retains standard ICA when the original signal scale is already compatible with linear source separation. Together, the two applications illustrate the complementary roles of AdaptICA: learning an appropriate trans-formation when it improves the independence structure, while preserving standard ICA when no transformation is supported by the data. 

# 5.1 Motor-Imagery EEG Analysis 

We first analyze the training session of subject A01 from the BCI Competition IV Dataset 2a [Berlin Brain-Computer Interface, 2008], a widely used benchmark for motor-imagery EEG analysis. The recordings contain 22 scalp EEG channels measured while the participant imagined movements of the left hand, right hand, feet, and tongue. These tasks are asso-ciated with changes in sensorimotor rhythms over physiologically relevant cortical regions. Complete information on trial extraction, signal cleaning, re-referencing, channel grouping, and feature construction is provided in G.2 of Supplemental Material. The analysis focuses on mu-band power, corresponding approximately to the 8–13 Hz frequency range. Mu rhythms are observed primarily over sensorimotor cortical regions, and task-related decreases and increases in mu-band power are commonly interpreted as event-related desynchronization and synchronization associated with motor preparation and 22 imagined movement [Pfurtscheller and Da Silva, 1999]. Mu-band power therefore has direct physiological relevance and is routinely used as a feature in motor-imagery brain–computer-interface studies. The construction of mu-band power provides the principal motivation for AdaptICA. Specifically, power is obtained by band-pass filtering the recorded voltage, squaring the band-limited amplitude, and locally averaging the resulting signal. This nonlinear compo-nentwise operation is performed after the latent neural signals have already been mixed at the scalp sensors and therefore need not preserve the linear source-mixture structure assumed by standard ICA. Conventional preprocessing typically imposes a prespecified logarithmic or square-root transformation, often uniformly across all channels and independently of the subsequent source-separation objective. In contrast, AdaptICA estimates spatially struc-tured Box–Cox transformation parameters using the independence criterion, allowing the measurement scale of the power representation to be adjusted before linear demixing. Fig-ure 1 illustrates the substantial change in measurement scale induced by the physiologically meaningful power calculation and thereby motivates transformation-based source separation. After preprocessing and temporal subsampling, the resulting dataset contains n = 13 ,451 observations measured over T = 22 channels. We considered several candidate latent dimen-sions together with a nested family of anatomically structured channel groupings. The proposed model-selection procedure selected br = 10 and bK = 7. Details of the candidate models, tuning procedure, and numerical results are provided in Supplemental Appendix G.3 of Supplemental Material. The two selected quantities have distinct interpretations. The value br = 10 specifies the dimension of the final latent representation, so that ten demixed component directions are 23 Figure 1: Representative marginal distributions of the cleaned EEG signals on three mea-surement scales: channel voltage (left), mu-band power obtained by squaring and locally av-eraging the 8–13 Hz band-limited amplitude (middle), and log mu-band power (right). The comparison illustrates the nonlinear change in scale induced by the physiologically meaning-ful power calculation and motivates estimating an appropriate transformation before linear source separation. retained from the original 22-channel recording. This value should not be interpreted as implying that the brain contains exactly ten physiological generators. Rather, it provides a parsimonious representation of the dominant independent structure identified in the analyzed recording. The selected value bK = 7 partitions the 22 EEG channels into seven spatial groups, with channels in the same group sharing one Box–Cox transformation parameter. The estimated transformation is bλEEG = (0 .115 , −0.509 , −0.771 , −1.000 , 0.258 , 0.873 , 0.055) ⊤,

24 where the seven entries correspond to the anterior-left, anterior-right, central-left, central-right, midline, posterior-left, and posterior-right channel groups, respectively. Thus, br = 10 determines the dimension of the recovered latent representation, whereas bK = 7 determines the spatial resolution of the transformation. Relative to the identity value λ = 1, values below one increasingly compress large power observations, with values near zero corresponding approximately to a logarithmic transformation. The substantial variation among the seven estimates indicates that the adjustment required for mu-band power differs across scalp regions, supporting a spatially adaptive transformation rather than a single transformation applied uniformly to all channels. For the selected specification ( br, bK) = (10 , 7), AdaptICA reduced the mutual informa-tion among the recovered components from 0 .07668 to 0 .04696, corresponding to a 38 .8% reduction. Distance correlation, which was not used to estimate the transformation param-eters, decreased from 0 .15064 to 0 .08511, a 43 .5% reduction. The consistent improvements under both dependence measures indicate that the fitted transformation produces a more nearly independent latent representation and that the improvement is not specific to the mutual-information criterion used for estimation. These improvements in statistical independence among the recovered components are ac-companied by greater spatial focality and task specificity under AdaptICA than under stan-dard ICA in the physiologically targeted hand-imagery comparisons. To evaluate whether the reduction in residual dependence is accompanied by clearer sensorimotor organization, we conducted a physiologically motivated comparison based on the expected spatial pat-terns of motor imagery. Right-hand imagery was evaluated over the contralateral C3 region, left-hand imagery over the contralateral C4 region, and feet imagery near the central mid-25 line around Cz. For each method and target region, we selected the component with the greatest target-region loading concentration and examined both its scalp topography and its cue-aligned, baseline-normalized trajectory. As shown in Figure 2, AdaptICA produced a clearly C3-centered component whose right-hand trajectory decreased during the imagery interval, with an imagery-window summary of 

−0.26. By comparison, the standard-ICA candidate did not exhibit a corresponding ERD-like decrease, with an imagery-window summary of +0 .15. For left-hand imagery, both methods produced similar imagery-window decreases, with values of −0.17 for standard ICA and −0.18 for AdaptICA, but the AdaptICA component was more strongly localized around the contralateral C4 region. In contrast, the feet-related comparison did not favor AdaptICA. The physiological gains should therefore be interpreted as component- and task-specific rather than uniform. Collectively, the results suggest that transformation learning can reveal selected sensorimotor patterns that are partially obscured when standard ICA is applied directly to the nonlinear mu-band-power scale, without implying that every recovered component must become more physiologically informative. The greater spatial focality of the hand-related AdaptICA components is quantified in Figure 3. For right-hand imagery, the proportion of total map energy at the peak C3 elec-trode increased from 23% under standard ICA to 42% under AdaptICA, while the proportion contained in the prespecified C3 region increased from approximately 35% to 81%. For left-hand imagery, the corresponding concentration at the peak C4 electrode increased from 21% to 49%, and the concentration within the C4 region increased from 42% to 69%. The cumula-tive map-energy curves further show how rapidly the component loading energy accumulates over the channels with the largest absolute loadings. 26 Figure 2: Recover component comparisons of standard ICA and AdaptICA for right-hand, left-hand, and feet motor imagery. Each row compares the component selected separately within each method using a physiologically motivated target-region criterion: C3 for right-hand imagery, C4 for left-hand imagery, and Cz for feet imagery. The first two columns show normalized scalp-loading maps, and the last two columns show task-averaged component trajectories relative to the pre-cue baseline. The target-task trajectory is emphasized by a thicker line. The dashed vertical line marks cue onset, and the shaded region denotes the 0– 4-second imagery interval. Component signs are oriented consistently with the target-region loading so that a negative target-task deflection can be interpreted as an ERD-like decrease. These differences clarify the practical effect of applying standard ICA directly to the nonlinear mu-band-power scale. Because standard ICA must represent the derived power variables using a purely linear demixing model, localized motor-related variation may be distributed over a broader scalp pattern or combined with diffuse scale-induced variation. 27 By adapting the measurement scale across scalp regions before demixing, AdaptICA can isolate selected contralateral hand-related patterns more sharply. The additional physiolog-ical interpretation is therefore not that AdaptICA uniformly produces stronger activation, but that it can yield a more spatially focused and task-specific representation of particular sensorimotor processes. 

Figure 3: Quantitative comparison of spatial concentration for the components selected for right-hand imagery over C3 and left-hand imagery over C4. Panels (a), (b), (e), and (f) show the normalized scalp-loading maps. Panels (c) and (g) show cumulative map energy after the channels are sorted from largest to smallest squared loading; the diagonal reference represents uniformly diffuse energy across the 22 channels. Panels (d) and (h) compare the percentage of total map energy at the target electrode and within the prespecified target region. AdaptICA yields greater target-electrode and target-region concentration for both hand-imagery comparisons, indicating more spatially focal contralateral sensorimotor repre-sentations. Taken together, the EEG results demonstrate that AdaptICA provides more than a re-28 duction in global dependence among the recovered components. By accounting for regional heterogeneity in the nonlinear mu-band-power scale, the method can produce selected latent components with clearer spatial localization and task-related interpretation. At the same time, the feet-related result confirms that such gains are not expected to occur uniformly across all tasks or components. A complete component-by-region and component-by-task assessment, which places these targeted examples within the full ten-component decompo-sition, is provided in Supplemental Figure ?? . The following MEG analysis provides a com-plementary case in which no transformation is selected and the standard ICA representation is retained. 

# 5.2 MEG Analysis 

We next apply the model-selection framework to continuous MEG recordings from the MNE sample-data repository [Gramfort et al., 2013, MNE Contributors, 2017]. These recordings were collected during an auditory–visual sensorimotor experiment and provide a complemen-tary application because MEG sensors measure magnetic fields generated by neural currents. Such fields are commonly represented through approximately linear electromagnetic super-position, making standard linear ICA a scientifically meaningful candidate for this signal representation. Detailed preprocessing and numerical results are provided in Supplemental Appendix ?? .The candidate model class explicitly included λ = 1, which represents the identity trans-formation and is therefore equivalent to standard ICA after centering. The model-selection procedure selected this identity model. Standard FastICA attained mutual information 29 0.013928, compared with 0 .014780 for the optimized nonidentity transformed candidate and 0.028055 for a fixed logarithmic transformation. Thus, the optimized nonidentity transfor-mation increased residual dependence by approximately 6 .1%, whereas the uniform logarith-mic transformation more than doubled the residual mutual information. The selection of 

λ = 1 has a meaningful scientific interpretation. It indicates that, for the analyzed MEG recordings, the original measurement scale is more compatible with a linear independent-component decomposition than the alternative transformed scales. This empirical result is consistent with the linear-superposition interpretation of MEG measurements. It also shows why transformations should not be imposed automatically: unnecessary transformation can obscure rather than improve the latent source structure. The EEG and MEG analyses therefore provide complementary demonstrations of the gen-eral contribution of AdaptICA. For EEG mu-band power, the scientifically motivated square operation changes the observed measurement scale, and region-specific Box–Cox transfor-mations yield components with substantially less residual dependence. For the MEG data, the selected value λ = 1 retains standard ICA because the original scale is empirically more appropriate. AdaptICA is consequently more than an additional preprocessing method. It is a flexible, unified model-selection framework that contains standard ICA as a special case, determines whether a transformation is supported by the data, and estimates the required transformation when the identity model is inadequate. More generally, the method extends the applicability of interpretable linear ICA to signal representations affected by unknown componentwise distortions without sacrificing the validity or practical advantages of standard ICA in settings where the linear model already fits well. 30 6 Conclusion and Future directions 

This paper proposed a transformation-based ICA framework that incorporates componen-twise Box–Cox transformations into a standard linear ICA pipeline. By selecting transfor-mation parameters through a profiled mutual-information criterion, TB-ICA directly tar-gets statistical independence while retaining the structure and practicality of classical ICA algorithms. The transformation step provides a data-driven correction for moderate nonlin-earities and post-nonlinear mixing, making TB-ICA a natural enhancement for EEG, MEG, fMRI, and related source-separation workflows. Theoretically, we established identifiability of the transformation parameter, consistency and asymptotic normality of the Stage 1 esti-mator, an oracle property for the Stage 2 FastICA demixing directions, and joint almost-sure consistency of the transformation parameters and demixing matrix. Several future directions remain. First, richer transformation families, such as spline-based or flow-based monotone maps, could improve flexibility while raising new questions about identifiability, regularization, and interpretability. Second, extending TB-ICA to tem-porally dependent signals and multi-subject studies may improve robustness and cross-subject comparability. The identified independent components could also serve as low-dimensional and interpretable latent predictors in downstream dynamic regression mod-els, including varying-coefficient frailty and mixed-effects formulations [Hung et al., 2022, Chalangar Jalili Dehkharghani and Lin, 2025]. Third, the relationship of TB-ICA to iden-tifiability frameworks based on temporal dependence or auxiliary variables [Hyv¨ arinen and Morioka, 2016, 2017, Lyu and Fu, 2022] should be further clarified. Finally, replacing mu-tual information with more robust or scalable dependence measures [Chen and Bickel, 2008, 31 Ilmonen and Paindaveine, 2011, Reyhani et al., 2012, Chen and Bickel, 2006, Matteson and Tsay, 2017] and developing online or adaptive variants would broaden TB-ICA’s applicability to real-time neurophysiology, large-scale multichannel systems, and other domains involving nonlinear marginal distortions. 

# References 

Francis R. Bach and Michael I. Jordan. Beyond independent components: Trees and clusters. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 4:1205–1233, 2003. Christian F. Beckmann and Stephen M. Smith. Probabilistic independent component anal-ysis for functional magnetic resonance imaging. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging ,23(2):137–152, 2004. Anthony J. Bell and Terrence J. Sejnowski. An information-maximization approach to blind separation and blind deconvolution. Neural Computation , 7(6):1129–1159, 1995. doi: 10.1162/neco.1995.7.6.1129. Berlin Brain-Computer Interface. BCI Competition IV Dataset 2a. 2008. Accessed: 2024. George E. P. Box and David R. Cox. An analysis of transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B , 26(2):211–243, 1964. Vince D. Calhoun, T¨ ulay Adali, Godfrey D. Pearlson, and James J. Pekar. A method for making group inferences from functional MRI data using independent component analysis. 

Human Brain Mapping , 14(3):140–151, 2001. doi: 10.1002/hbm.1048. Vince D. Calhoun, Jingyu Liu, and T¨ ulay Adali. A review of group ica for fmri data and ica for joint inference of imaging, genetic, and erp data. 45(1 Suppl):S163–S172, 2009. Jean-Fran¸ cois Cardoso. High-order contrasts for independent component analysis. Neural Computation , 11(1):157–192, 1999. doi: 10.1162/089976699300016863. Jean-Fran¸ cois Cardoso. Dependence, correlation and gaussianity in independent component analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 4:1177–1203, 2003. Jean-Fran¸ cois Cardoso and Antoine Souloumiac. Blind beamforming for non-Gaussian sig-nals. IEE Proceedings F (Radar and Signal Processing) , 140(6):362–370, 1993. Lida Chalangar Jalili Dehkharghani and Li-Hsiang Lin. Scalable and communication-efficient varying coefficient mixed effect models: Methodology, theory, and applications, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.12732 .Aiyou Chen and Peter J. Bickel. Efficient independent component analysis. The Annals of Statistics , 34(6):2824–2855, 2006. doi: 10.1214/009053606000000939. 32 Aiyou Chen and Peter J. Bickel. Consistent independent component analysis and prewhiten-ing. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 56(9):4437–4448, 2008. doi: 10.1109/TSP. 2008.921144. Pierre Comon. Independent component analysis, a new concept? Signal Processing , 36(3): 287–314, 1994. doi: 10.1016/0165-1684(94)90029-9. Annette J. Dobson and Adrian Barnett. An Introduction to Generalized Linear Models .Texts in Statistical Science. Chapman and Hall/CRC, 4 edition, 2018. Alexandre Gramfort, Martin Luessi, Eric Larson, Denis A Engemann, Daniel Strohmeier, Christian Brodbeck, Roman Goj, Mainak Jas, Teon Brooks, Lauri Parkkonen, et al. Meg and eeg data analysis with mne-python. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics , 7:267, 2013. Matti S. H¨ am¨ al¨ ainen, Riitta Hari, Risto J. Ilmoniemi, Jukka Knuutila, and Olli V. Lounas-maa. Magnetoencephalography—theory, instrumentation, and applications to noninvasive studies of the working human brain. Reviews of Modern Physics , 65(2):413–497, 1993. doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.65.413. Stefan Harmeling, Andreas Ziehe, Motoaki Kawanabe, and Klaus-Robert M¨ uller. Kernel-based nonlinear blind source separation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 15, pages 601–608, 2003. Ying Hung, Li-Hsiang Lin, and CF Jeff Wu. Varying coefficient frailty models with applica-tions in single molecular experiments. Biometrics , 78(2):474–486, 2022. Aapo Hyv¨ arinen. Fast and robust fixed-point algorithms for independent component analysis. 

IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks , 10(3):626–634, 1999. doi: 10.1109/72.761722. Aapo Hyv¨ arinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Unsupervised feature extraction by time-contrastive learning and nonlinear ICA. Neural Computation , 28(5):1285–1318, 2016. doi: 10.1162/ NECO a 00801. Aapo Hyv¨ arinen and Hiroshi Morioka. Nonlinear ICA of temporally dependent stationary sources. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 18(8):1–63, 2017. Aapo Hyv¨ arinen and Erkki Oja. Independent component analysis: Algorithms and applica-tions. Neural Networks , 13(4–5):411–430, 2000. doi: 10.1016/S0893-6080(00)00026-5. Aapo Hyv¨ arinen, Juha Karhunen, and Erkki Oja. Independent Component Analysis . John Wiley & Sons, 2001. Pauliina Ilmonen and Davy Paindaveine. Semiparametrically efficient inference based on signed ranks in symmetric independent component models. Annals of Statistics , 39(5): 2448–2476, 2011. doi: 10.1214/11-AOS921. Risto J. Ilmoniemi, Matti S. H¨ am¨ al¨ ainen, and Drazenko Kicic. Brain signals: MEG and EEG. Comprehensive Biomedical Physics , 6:1–11, 2019. 33 Christian Jutten and Juha Karhunen. Advances in blind source separation and independent component analysis for nonlinear mixtures. 14:267–292, 2003. Arkadii M. Kagan, Yuri V. Linnik, and C. Radhakrishna Rao. Characterization Problems in Mathematical Statistics . John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1973. Erik G. Learned-Miller and III Fisher, John W. ICA using spacings estimates of entropy. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 4:1271–1295, 2003. Te-Won Lee, Jean-Fran¸ cois Cardoso, Erkki Oja, and Shun-ichi Amari. Introduction to special issue on independent components analysis. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 4:1175– 1176, 2003. Li-Hsiang Lin and V. Roshan Joseph. Transformation and additivity in gaussian processes. 

Technometrics , 62(4):525–535, 2020. Qi Lyu and Xiao Fu. On finite-sample identifiability of contrastive learning-based nonlinear independent component analysis. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference on Machine Learning , ICML, 2022. Scott Makeig, Anthony J. Bell, Tzyy-Ping Jung, and Terrence J. Sejnowski. Independent component analysis of electroencephalographic data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 8:145–151, 1996. David S. Matteson and Ruey S. Tsay. Independent component analysis via distance co-variance. Journal of the American Statistical Association , 112(518):623–637, 2017. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2016.1180989. MNE Contributors. MNE Sample Dataset. Open Science Framework, https://osf.io/ 86qa2/ , 2017. Accessed: 2024. Jos´ e M. P. Nascimento and Jos´ e M. Bioucas-Dias. Does independent component analysis play a role in unmixing hyperspectral data? 43(1):175–187, 2005. Paul L. Nunez and Ramesh Srinivasan. Electric Fields of the Brain: The Neurophysics of EEG . Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2 edition, 2006. Niklas Pfister, Sebastian Weichwald, Peter B¨ uhlmann, and Bernhard Sch¨ olkopf. Robustifying independent component analysis by adjusting for group-wise stationary noise. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(147):1–50, 2019. Gert Pfurtscheller and FH Lopes Da Silva. Event-related eeg/meg synchronization and desynchronization: basic principles. Clinical neurophysiology , 110(11):1842–1857, 1999. James O. Ramsay. Monotone regression splines in action. Statistical Science , 3(4):425–461, 1988. Nima Reyhani, Jarkko Ylipaavalniemi, Ricardo Vig´ ario, and Erkki Oja. Consistency and asymptotic normality of FastICA and bootstrap FastICA. Signal Processing , 92(8):1767– 1778, 2012. doi: 10.1016/j.sigpro.2012.02.008. 34 Jaakko S¨ arel¨ a and Harri Valpola. Denoising source separation. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 6(9):233–272, 2005. Jaakko S¨ arel¨ a and Ricardo Vig´ ario. Overlearning in marginal distribution-based ICA: Anal-ysis and solutions. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 4:1447–1469, 2003. Hiroaki Sasaki and Takashi Takenouchi. Representation learning for maximization of MI, nonlinear ICA and nonlinear subspaces with robust density ratio estimation. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 23(231):1–55, 2022. A. Taleb and C. Jutten. Source separation in post-nonlinear mixtures. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 47(10):2807–2820, 1999. doi: 10.1109/78.790661. Ricardo Vig´ ario, Jaakko Sarela, Veikko Jousm¨ aki, Matti H¨ am¨ al¨ ainen, and Erkki Oja. In-dependent component approach to the analysis of EEG and MEG recordings. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , 47(5):589–593, 2000. doi: 10.1109/10.841330. Joni Virta, Klaus Nordhausen, and Hannu Oja. Asymptotic properties of the JADE estima-tor. Journal of Multivariate Analysis , 145:168–182, 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.jmva.2015.10.006. 35