Title: The blueprint of human functional architecture shifts from cognition to anatomy during perturbations of consciousness

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# The blueprint of human functional architecture shifts from cognition to anatomy during perturbations of consciousness 

Andrea I. Luppi 1,2,3,∗ Dragana Manasova 4, Justine Y. Hansen 3,5, Zhen-Qi Liu 3, Asa Farahani 3, Yonatan Sanz Perl 6,Jakub Vohryzek 6, Daniel Golkowski 7,8, Andreas Ranft 7, Rüdiger Ilg 7, Denis Jordan 7, Vincent Bonhomme 9,10 ,11 ,Audrey Vanhaudenhuyse 12 , Athena Demertzi 13 , Oceane Jaquet 9, Mohamed Ali Bahri 14 , Naji L. N. Alnagger 15 , Paolo Cardone 15 , Lorina Naci 16 , Adrian M. Owen 17 , John D. Pickard 18 , Guy B. Williams 18 , Judith Allanson 18 , Enrico Amico 19 , Danilo Bzdok 3,20 , Jacobo D. Sitt 21 , David K. Menon 22 , Emmanuel A. Stamatakis 18 ,22 , Bratislav Misic 3

> 1

Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK 

> 2

Division of Information Engineering and St John’s College, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 

> 3

Montréal Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montréal, QC, Canada 

> 4

Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA 

> 5

Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA 

> 6

Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain 

> 7

Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 

> 8

Department of Neurology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany 

> 9

Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine, Liège University Hospital, Liège, Belgium 

> 10

Anesthesia and Perioperative Neuroscience Laboratory, GIGA-Consciousness, GIGA Institute, Liège University, Liège, Belgium 

> 11

Interdisciplinary Algology Center, Liège University Hospital, Liège, Belgium 

> 12

Conscious Care Lab, GIGA Consciousness, GIGA Institute, University of Liège, Belgium 

> 13

Physiology of Cognition Lab, GIGA-Cyclotron Research Center In Vivo Imaging, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium 

> 14

GIGA-Cyclotron Research Center Human Imaging, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium 

> 15

Coma Science Group, GIGA-Consciousness, GIGA Institute, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium 

> 16

School of Psychology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland 

> 17

Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, and Department of Psychology, Western University, London, ON, Canada 

> 18

Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 

> 19

University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK 

> 20

MILA-Quebec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montréal, QC, Canada 

> 21

Paris Brain Institute, Paris, France 

> 22

Division of Anaesthesia, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 

Consciousness and cognition arise from the ongoing interactions between brain regions. Synchronous fluctuations of fMRI signals may indicate that two brain regions perform similar cognitive functions, but neural interactions are also constrained by anatomical connectivity and regions’ molecular, cytoarchi-tectonic, and metabolic profiles. Here we disentangle the respective contributions of ongoing cognition and multimodal neurobiological constraints in shaping functional connectivity. We jointly contextu-alise haemodynamic FC against eight distinct multimodal representations of the human connectome: (i) structural connectivity from diffusion tractography; (ii) spatial embedding; (iii) similarity of tran-scriptional profiles from gene expression; (iv) similarity of receptor profiles from Positron Emission Tomography; (v) laminar profile similarity from histology; (vi) correlated electrophysiological activity from magnetoencephalography; (vii) correlated metabolic activity from PET glucose uptake; (viii) co-ordinated activation across 123 cognitive operations from the NeuroSynth meta-analytic engine. We demonstrate that cognitive co-activation is the dominant predictor of inter-regional fMRI synchrony in the awake human brain, even when quantified using intracranial electrical stimulation. Crucially, this predominance of cognitive co-activation for shaping functional connectivity is systematically obliter-ated across five datasets of pharmacological and pathological perturbations of consciousness (chronic disorders of consciousness; anaesthesia with sevoflurane, propofol, or ketamine) when cognition is disconnected from the environment or altogether abolished. Altogether, we show that multimodal predictors of functional architecture shift away from cognitive co-activation and toward anatomical-molecular constraints during pharmacological and pathological perturbations of consciousness. 

INTRODUCTION 

How brain organisation enables conscious experience is a question of enduring neuroscientific interest. Non-invasive neuroimaging with functional MRI has revealed  

> ∗andrea.luppi@psych.ox.ac.uk

a complex functional architecture, with brain regions continuously forming and dissolving coalitions of syn-chronous haemodynamic activity [1–3]. Synchronous co-fluctuations are taken to indicate that two regions are involved in similar cognitive functions: hence the name of ‘functional’ connectivity (FC) [1–3]. Indeed, patterns of haemodynamic FC bear predictive value for cognition, behaviour, pathology, and individual identity 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

2[4–10]. Even in the absence of explicit tasks, FC is far from random, instead recapitulating task-induced co-activations [11–16]. Coordinated activity across tasks reflects which regions are consistently recruited by the same cognitive operations—such as attention, memory, emotion or language—thereby indicating similarity of cognitive function. Further supporting the cognitive rel-evance of haemodynamic FC, when consciousness is lost due to general anaesthesia or disorders of conscious-ness, FC reverts to the underlying scaffold of anatomical connections between regions [17–22], and information about individual identity is lost [23]. At the same time, a rich literature has identified over-lapping macro- and microarchitectural constraints on functional connectivity [24, 25]. In addition to the role of direct and indirect structural connectivity [26–36], functional interactions between regions also depend on whether they exhibit similar profiles of neurotransmit-ter receptors [37–40]; similar metabolic demand [41– 43] and preferred neurophysiological frequencies [44– 49]; spatial embedding [50]; and on the similarity of their broader molecular [51–55] and microarchitectural fingerprints [24, 56–62]. Each of these features of brain organisation provides a distinct, complementary way to understand how brain structure informs and constrains function [24–26], and how the brain is reorganised fol-lowing injury [63]. Yet previous studies have not directly compared these contraposed accounts of FC. The question arises: What are the respective contri-butions of brain architecture and ongoing cognition for shaping functional connectivity? Here we pursue this question with a two-pronged strategy. To go beyond conventional univariate comparisons, we adopt a multi-variate approach to jointly contextualise haemodynamic FC against eight distinct ways of characterising struc-tural and functional relationships between cortical re-gions (Fig. 1). Specifically, we consider: (i) spatial dis-tance between regions; (ii) the structural white matter connectome reconstructed from diffusion MRI tractog-raphy; (iii) covariance of regional gene expression pro-files from spatial transcriptomics [52]; (iv) similarity of regional receptor profiles from in vivo Positron Emis-sion Tomography (PET) in > 1 200 participants [38]; (v) laminar profile similarity from ex vivo histological cell staining [62, 64]; (vi) correlated electrophysiolog-ical activity from source-resolved magnetoencephalogra-phy (MEG) [45]; (vii) correlated metabolic activity mea-sured with dynamic fluorodeoxyglucose uptake (FDG-PET) [41]; and finally (viii) co-activation across 123 cognitive operations (Table 1) from NeuroSynth meta-analysis, aggregated over 14 000 neuroimaging studies (cognitive co-activations, for short) [12, 14, 15, 65]. These multimodal anatomical and functional networks [24] provide a comprehensive characterisation of the re-lationships between human cortical regions (Fig. 1). Next, we employ general anaesthesia as an experimen-tal paradigm to disentangle the respective contributions of anatomy and cognition to haemodynamic FC. General anaesthesia is an acute pharmacological manipulation that profoundly alters or altogether abolishes cognition, as indicated by complete cessation of the organism’s abil-ity to process and respond to stimuli in the environment. Crucially, anaesthesia leaves anatomy intact (unlike e.g. a brain lesion), providing an ideal means to disentan-gle whether anatomical contributions to haemodynamic connectivity change in the presence versus absence of ongoing cognition. Specifically, we consider datasets of general anaesthesia with propofol [66], sevoflurane [67], and a high dose of ketamine [68], all inducing disconnection from the environment with complete loss of behavioural responsiveness. We then generalise re-sults beyond pharmacology, in two datasets of patho-logical perturbation of consciousness due to brain in-jury (chronic disorders of consciousness) [63, 66]. To foreshadow our main results, our multimodal approach reveals that pharmacological and pathological perturba-tions of consciousness do not only increase the contribu-tion of anatomical-molecular constraints for predicting fMRI functional connectivity, but also induce a shift away from cognitive co-activation as predictor of functional ar-chitecture. 

> RESULTS Cognitive co-activation is the best predictor of haemodynamic functional connectivity

Here we ask how perturbation of consciousness and disconnection from the environment induced by injury or pharmacology - whereby cognition is profoundly per-turbed or altogether abolished - reshape the relationship between different types of functional and structural net-works in the human brain. To disambiguate the con-tributions of each structural and functional network to FC, we use dominance analysis, a multivariate approach that optimally distributes the fit (variance explained) of a multiple regression model across individual predictors. This procedure is well suited to the present analysis be-cause unlike methods based on regression coefficients or univariate correlations, it estimates predictor importance while accounting for shared variance among correlated predictors [69, 70]. The first discovery is that across all datasets, by far the best predictor of haemodynamic functional connectiv-ity is the network of regions’ co-activation across cogni-tive operations, derived from NeuroSynth meta-analysis. Similarity across NeuroSynth maps consistently accounts for > 50% of the explained variance in the awake human brain’s BOLD FC (Fig. 2). It is remarkable that resting-state coordinated haemodynamics are better recapitu-lated by task-related co-activations aggregated from the literature, than by coordinated metabolic activity from FDG-PET, or coordinated electrodynamics from MEG. This is surprising because one might have expected that these alternative functional networks would be the most 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

3

Figure 1. Structural and functional networks of the human brain | (a) Physical relationships between brain regions: Euclidean distance between regions (mm), and structural connectivity (number of white matter fibers reconstructed from in vivo diffusion tractography). For visualisation purposes, values are normalised to the maximum. ( b) Local biological similarity: correlation of regions’ receptor expression from Positron Emission Tomography; correlation of regions’ gene expression from spatial transcrip-tomics; and correlation of laminar profiles from histology. ( c) Similarity of function: correlated metabolic activity from FDG-PET; correlated electrodynamic activity from MEG; and correlation of involvement across 123 cognitive operations from NeuroSynth meta-analysis. The networks are available at https://github.com/netneurolab/hansen_many_networks/tree/v1.0.0. 

relevant predictors of BOLD FC. First, because both FDG-PET FC and MEG-FC are obtained directly from time-series of regional activity, like BOLD FC but unlike meta-analytic co-activation. Second, FDG-PET FC and MEG-FC both reflect the same kind of process as BOLD FC: synchronous activity over time, in the absence of any task. Instead, we find that regions’ propensity for exhibit-ing spontaneous fMRI co-fluctuations is best predicted by their propensity for activating together in response to a variety of tasks. This observation is consistent with ob-servations that the spontaneous fluctuations of the BOLD signal are not random, instead recapitulating cognitively-relevant co-activations [11–16]. 

Pharmacological and pathological perturbations of consciousness induce a shift away from cognitive co-activation 

This picture is drastically altered upon pharmaco-logical or pathological perturbations of consciousness. Across anaesthesia with propofol, sevoflurane, and a high dose of ketamine (all inducing complete loss of behavioural responsiveness) and also in DOC patients, we find that cognitive co-activations from NeuroSynth significantly and consistently reduce their relative im-portance as predictors of FC, compared with baseline (Fig. 3a-d). This effect is then reversed upon recovery of responsiveness from both sevoflurane and propofol anaesthesia (Fig. 3b-d and Fig. S1). In other words, when behavioural responsiveness is lost, and cogni-tion is disconnected from the environment or altogether abolished, we see that the spontaneous co-fluctuations of human haemodynamics cease to mirror regions’ co-involvement across cognitive operations (Fig. 3b-d and Fig. S1). We confirm this by showing that the network of meta-analytic co-activations is the most impacted by anaesthesia and DOC, in terms of exhibiting the greatest magnitude of change in relative importance (Fig. 3e). Based on the literature, we might expect to observe an increased contribution from the structural connec-tome in DOC patients as well as sevoflurane and propofol anaesthesia [17, 18, 21]—which is indeed what we find. However, we do not observe this for ketamine anaes-thesia. The ketamine dose induced complete loss of be-havioural responsiveness, with Ramsay score of 5-6 [68] comparable to the propofol and sevoflurane datasets 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

4   

> Figure 2. Meta-analytic co-activation is the dominant pre-dictor of fMRI functional connectivity | Bars indicate the mean percentage of relative importance of each network for predicting fMRI functional connectivity, averaged across the baseline conditions of all datasets. See Fig. 3 for dataset-by-dataset breakdown.

[66, 67]. However, participants in the ketamine dataset were not unconscious [68, 71]. Indeed, the present re-sults are consistent with a recent report in the same ke-tamine dataset, which also found that unlike propofol and DOC, ketamine does not increase structure-function coupling in the human brain [71]. Notably, we also find that under perturbations of consciousness, haemo-dynamic FC becomes better predicted by regional co-expression of genes and receptors, and especially by the slow metabolic co-fluctuations measured by FDG-PET (Fig. 3b,c). These observations are consistent across pharmacological and pathological perturbations, includ-ing ketamine, and are not driven by differences in head motion, which we include as covariate of no interest. No changes in predictive performance are observed for ei-ther microstructural profile similarity (except in DOC) or MEG electrodynamic similarity. Spatial distance also does not exhibit consistent changes. Thus, under pertur-bations of consciousness we see consistent increases in the coupling between FC and different aspects of brain anatomy. In contrast, no significant changes are observed in a test-retest dataset (Fig. 3d), further confirming that the relative contributions of different brain networks to FC are not only highly consistent across datasets, but also stable over time within the same dataset. We also ask whether the dominance of meta-analytic co-activation for predicting fMRI FC, and the impact of anaesthesia and DOC, are primarily driven by connec-tions involving specific cortical territories. We divide the cortex in unimodal and transmodal regions, accord-ing to the canonical map of [72]. We then repeat the same analysis using only connections between unimodal regions; or only connections between transmodal re-gions; or only connections involving one unimodal and one transmodal region (Fig. S2). In all three cases, we find that meta-analytic co-activation is the domi-nant predictor of haemodynamic FC at baseline (Fig. S2) and also the predictor most affected by anaesthesia and DOC (Fig. S3 and Fig. S4). However, both the rela-tive dominance of meta-analytic co-activation and the ex-tent to which it is affected by anaesthesia and DOC are most pronounced for connections involving transmodal cortex (especially transmodal-transmodal, where results mostly resemble the whole-brain analysis), and least pro-nounced for unimodal-unimodal connections (Fig. S2 and Fig. S4). These results indicate that the relevance of cognitive co-activations for tracking state of conscious-ness is especially prominent for the cortical types most involved in higher-order cognition. 

> Multivariate classification of consciousness and prognosis

To complement the main group-level analysis we show that the relative contributions of different structural and functional networks in predicting haemodynamic FC can be used to classify perturbed versus unperturbed consciousness at the single-participant level. We train a machine learning classifier (support vector machine, SVM) using the subject-wise patterns of networks’ rel-ative contributions to FC from controls, DOC patients, and anaesthesia (including pre-anaesthetic baseline and anaesthesia, but excluding post-anaesthetic recovery). The SVM is trained to distinguish unperturbed baseline from perturbed consciousness, using leave-one-out cross-validation. This machine learning model achieves 91% 

accuracy: significantly better performance than chance (p < 0.001 ; permutation test with 5,000 repetitions with shuffled labels; Fig. 4a), comparing favourably with re-cent DOC classification efforts [63]. The SVM trained on the relative importance of different networks is also significantly better than the performance ( 79% accuracy) obtained by following exactly the same training regime, but using the univariate correlations between FC and each brain network, instead of the relative importance from dominance analysis ( p = 0 .002 ; χ2 = 9.39 from McNemar test) (Fig. S5). Finally, we consider out-of-sample validation for the model. First, we use the trained SVM to classify the re-covery data from the sevoflurane and propofol datasets, which were not included in the data used to train the SVM. In all but one case, individuals (who were all re-sponsive at this stage) are correctly assigned to unper-turbed consciousness, despite the lingering presence of anaesthetic in their bloodstream (Fig. 4b). Then, we use the same SVM to classify an independent sample of DOC patients (Paris dataset, N=51 patients). The group comprises a broader range of DOC patients, including not only vegetative state/unresponsive wakefulness syn-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

Figure 3. Contribution of cognitively-relevant co-activations to functional connectivity is consistent across datasets but reduced under perturbed consciousness | (a) Mean percent relative importance from dominance analysis for predicting FC from structural and functional brain networks, for the baseline scans (pre-anaesthetic wakefulness, post-anaesthetic recovery of respon-siveness, and healthy controls). ( b) Mean percent relative importance from dominance analysis for predicting FC from structural and functional brain networks, for the perturbed consciousness datasets (anaesthesia and DOC patients). For comparison, the second scan of the test-retest dataset is also included. ( c) Change in percentage of relative importance under anaesthesia. ( d)Change in percentage of relative importance in DOC patients or in a second scan of the same healthy controls. *, p < 0.05 (head motion is included as covariate of no interest). For (c) and (d), red color-scale indicates perturbed > baseline; blue color-scale indicates baseline > perturbed. See Tables S1-S2 for statistical reporting. Note that the first scan of the test-retest dataset is used as the control group for the DOC patients. For the sevoflurane and propofol datasets, the same anaesthetised scan is compared against both baseline wakefulness and post-anaesthetic recovery of responsiveness. ( e) Mean magnitude of change (t-score) across contrasts from the anaesthesia and DOC datasets. 

drome and minimally conscious state (further subdivided into MCS ‘plus’ and ‘minus’), like the Cambridge dataset, but also coma and emergence from MCS (EMCS). We find that using the patients’ patterns of relative impor-tance from dominance analysis, the SVM classifies 71% (10 /14 ) of the EMCS and MCS+ patients as being in a state of perturbed consciousness (i.e., more similar to anaesthetised than to awake individuals, and therefore presumed unconscious), and similarly 66% ( 10 /15 ) of the MCS-, reaching an even higher proportion (81%, or 18 /22 ) for the VS/coma patients, whose disorder is most severe. Further complementing this approach of bi-nary classification, we apply multiple regression to pre-dict the Paris DOC patients’ Glasgow Outcome Scale -Extended (GOSE) scores at 6 months. We find that the subject-wise patterns of networks’ relative contributions to fMRI FC can account for 34% of the variance in DOC patients’ GOSE scores after 6 months, significantly more than would be expected by chance ( p = 0 .011 ; Fig. S6). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6     

> Figure 4. Machine learning classification of consciousness from multimodal network contributions | (a) Confusion matrix for the classification of pharmacological and pathological perturbations of consciousness using the relative importance of multimodal networks, achieving 91% accuracy (p < 0.001) after training a support vector machine using leave-one-out cross-validation. (b)
> Classification of unseen data: the recovery scans from the sevoflurane and deep propofol anaesthesia datasets; and three different groups of DOC patients from the Paris dataset: emerged from minimally conscious (EMCS) and MCS+; MCS-; and coma and vegetative state (also known as unresponsive wakefulness syndrome).
> Cross-modal validation with causal functional circuits from electrical stimulation

The network of meta-analytic co-activations reflects which regions are consistently recruited by the same cog-nitive operations: it identifies the macroscale circuits that support different facets of cognition in the human brain, indicating similarity of function. However, it is based on results from functional MRI, the same modal-ity used to quantify the prediction target of haemody-namic connectivity. Nonetheless, it should be noted that NeuroSynth is not based on resting-state fMRI, but rather task-fMRI. In fact, the NeuroSynth meta-analytic maps are not directly computed from any task-fMRI data; rather, each map is obtained by aggregating the co-occurrence of terms and coordinates across articles in the published literature [65]. Hence the extent to which haemodynamic FC and NeuroSynth meta-analytic co-activation are ‘the same modality’ is at best indirect. To corroborate this theoretical argument with empir-ical data, and dispel the possibility that the dominance of cognitive co-activations may be driven by use of the same imaging technique, we replicate our main analy-sis using a different, complementary strategy to quan-tify similarity of function: elicitation of similar subjective experiences in response to direct intracranial electrical stimulation, across a large sample of patients undergoing pre-surgical mapping [73]. Experiences elicited by direct electrical stimulation were grouped into eight categories: somatomotor, visual, olfactory, vestibular, emotion, lan-guage, memory, and physiological (Fig. 5a). Different regions elicit these categories with different probabilities upon direct electrical stimulation, and we obtain a co-elicitation network by correlating regions’ profiles of elic-itation probabilities across the eight categories (Fig. 5a). This co-elicitation approach is complementary to meta-analytic co-activation in several respects. First, co-elicitation is based on similarity of effects across direct experimental manipulations. Second, the direction of inference between brain regions and cognition is dif-ferent. Instead of starting from a cognitive operation (i.e., a term for the term-based meta-analysis) and ask-ing which regions co-activate in studies that mention this term, co-elicitation starts from an area of cortex and asks which subjective experiences it elicits upon direct intracranial electrical stimulation. Third, the modality is different: co-elicitation is quantified based on sub-jective reports following intracranial electrical stimula-tion, rather than activation from functional MRI tasks. Fourth, co-elicitation does not rely on meta-analytic data-aggregation, but rather it is based on the results of a single study from hundreds of patients–thereby provid-ing stronger experimental confidence [73, 74]. Despite all these differences with the meta-analytic approach, use of electrical co-elicitation reproduces our main findings. First, we find that when defined in terms of subjective co-elicitation, the network of cognitive sim-ilarity accounts for 26-37% of the variance in functional connectivity, thereby remaining the predictor with high-est relative importance (Fig. S7). Second, we also find that the relative importance of the network of cognitive similarity is significantly reduced under pathological and pharmacological loss of consciousness (Fig. 5b), as low as 6% in the case of DOC patients (Fig. S7). Also in ac-cordance with the main analysis, use of the networks’ dis-tribution of relative importances from dominance analy-sis allows for high classification accuracy (89%) of con-scious versus unconscious individuals (Fig. S8). Alto-gether, similarity of subjective experiences elicited by di-rect intracranial stimulation reflects regions’ shared cog-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

7nitive roles, without use of fMRI. This analysis therefore allowed us to disentangle whether the network of meta-analytic co-activations predicts haemodynamic FC due to its cognitive relevance, or merely due to the shared modality of fMRI. We found that what matters is the similarity of regions’ cognitive roles, not the modality through which they are assessed. 

> Robustness and sensitivity

We replicate the main results using a different par-cellation (the Desikan-Killiany atlas [75], which is de-fined anatomically instead of functionally). We find con-sistent results for the predominant importance of meta-analytic co-activation for predicting haemodynamic FC, and how it is affected by anaesthesia and DOC (Fig. S9 and Fig. S10). Indeed, there is a significant correlation between the changes in relative importance observed in the main analysis, and in this replication (Spearman 

ρ = 0 .70 , p < 0.001 ). Using the same anatomical atlas, we also replicate the main results with a different method for quantify-ing meta-analytic co-activation: using the expert-curated BrainMap database [12, 76], instead of NeuroSynth which is an automated tool (Fig. S11). We find that this alternative meta-analytic approach is less power-ful than NeuroSynth at recapitulating FC in the awake healthy brain, accounting for only 25 − 30% of the vari-ance explained (compared with 45 −55% for NeuroSynth, for both Schaefer and Desikan-Killiany atlases)—possibly due to the smaller number of studies included, be-ing a manually-curated database (Fig. S13). Neverthe-less, meta-analytic co-activation remains the most impor-tant predictor of haemodynamic FC at baseline, and us-ing BrainMap we again find that perturbations of con-sciousness induce prominent reductions in the contri-bution (relative importance) of cognitively-relevant co-activation to FC (Fig. S12). This effect fails to meet sta-tistical significance for the ketamine anaesthesia dataset and for recovery-versus-propofol, after controlling for head motion. We also observe that the counterbalancing increase is primarily observed for gene expression simi-larity, rather than receptor expression or metabolic simi-larity, which is what we had observed in the main results. Despite these minor discrepancies, we find a significant positive correlation between the changes in relative im-portance observed in the main analysis with NeuroSynth, and in the BrainMap replication (Spearman ρ = 0 .63 ,

p < 0.001 ). We also replicate the main results using gene expres-sion data obtained from RNA-seq rather than microar-ray. The relative importance of gene co-expression for explaining FC in the awake brain is similar across the two modalities, around 7-10% (Fig. S14). Consistent with the main results using microarray data, we also find that during unconsciousness, the contribution of meta-analytic co-activation to FC is significantly and consis-tently reduced, and there is instead an increased con-tribution of gene co-expression and to some extent re-ceptor co-expression and metabolic similarity (Fig. S15). Indeed, we find a significant correlation between the changes in relative importance observed in the main analysis with microarray, and in the RNA-seq replication (Spearman ρ = 0 .79 , p < 0.001 ). As a further robustness check, we replicate the main results using an alternative approach for revealing the anatomical connectivity between regions: instead of dif-fusion tractography (which is non-invasive but also not causal), we use the amplitude of cortico-cortical evoked potentials between pairs of regions, as estimated from >

34 354 direct electrical stimulations in 780 patients with epilepsy from the F-TRACT database [77] (Fig. S16). The rationale for this approach is that, if direct electrical stim-ulation in region i induces an electrical evoked poten-tial in region j (as recorded by stereo-EEG), then this is causal evidence that region i is directly or indirectly con-nected to region j. Being predicated on a region’s capac-ity to exert causal influence on another, this method ar-guably reflects effective connectivity, as opposed to struc-tural connectivity [78]. Although this method of esti-mating anatomical connectivity between pairs of regions is conceptually very different from non-invasive diffu-sion tractography, we find highly consistent results be-tween the two, including a predominant role of the Neu-roSynth co-activation at baseline (Fig. S17), and a reduc-tion of its relative importance under loss of consciousness (Fig. S18). The consistency of results is confirmed quan-titatively by the significant positive correlation between the changes in relative importance observed in the main analysis with diffusion tractography, and in the F-TRACT replication (Spearman ρ = 0 .63 , p < 0.001 ). We also show that cognitively-relevant co-activation remains consistently the most dominant predictor of haemodynamic FC in the healthy brain, when only spe-cific frequency bands are used for computing electrody-namic connectivity from MEG: delta (2–4 Hz), theta (5– 7 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), beta (15–29 Hz), low gamma (30–59 Hz), and high gamma (60–90 Hz) (Fig. S19). Re-sults exhibit some frequency-specificity: MEG connectiv-ity becomes the second-best predictor when alpha-band is considered, narrowly outperforming molecular archi-tecture and anatomical connectivity. It may seem surpris-ing that the highest performance of MEG connectivity for predicting haemodynamic FC is observed for frequencies in the alpha rather than delta band, which is the slowest (2-4Hz) and therefore closest to the timescale of fMRI. However, it was already shown at the univariate level that the correspondence between fMRI and MEG func-tional connectivity does not peak in the delta-band [45], which the present multivariate results corroborate. Through the analysis of subjective experiences elicited by direct stimulation, we demonstrated that the ca-pacity of meta-analytic co-activation to predict coordi-nated haemodynamics is not due to the shared modal-ity (fMRI), which direct intracranial stimulation does not 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8  

> Figure 5. Reduced contribution of meta-analytic co-activation to functional connectivity is replicated with the network of similarity of subjective experiences elicited by intracranial electrical stimulation | *, p < 0.05 with head motion included as covariate of no interest. See Tables S3-S4 for statistical reporting. Red color-scale indicates altered > baseline. Blue color-scale indicates baseline > altered.

share. Rather, what matters is the similarity of regions’ cognitive roles, which NeuroSynth co-activation and di-rect intracranial stimulation both capture, through very different avenues. For our final analysis, we show that the converse also holds: shared modality alone is not the main predictor of how different regions coordinate their haemodynamic activity. To do so, we replicate results after adding an additional predictor network: similarity of blood perfusion from Arterial Spin Labelling (ASL). Although the BOLD signal is based on haemodynamics, which is closely related to blood perfusion, we find that co-perfusion is only the second-best predictor, account-ing for approximately 25% of explained variance in fMRI FC (Fig. S20). In contrast, meta-analytic cognitive co-activation remains by far the most important predictor of awake BOLD FC, accounting for 40 − 45% of the ex-plained variance (Fig. S20). As with the main analysis, meta-analytic co-activation is also the predictor that is most affected by anaesthesia and DOC, occurring con-sistently in each dataset, even when similarity of blood perfusion is included (Fig. S21). Altogether, the present findings are observed across multiple datasets (propofol, sevoflurane, and ketamine anaesthesia); they remain stable across test-retest; and they generalise to an unseen cohort of DOC patients. Re-sults are neither driven by head motion, nor by simple Euclidean distance between parcels. We also provide ev-idence that results are robust to the choice of parcellation (anatomical or functional), to the use of a different gene expression database (RNA-seq), to the choice of neuro-physiological frequency band, and to the use of a dif-ferent method for connectome reconstruction (cortico-cortical evoked potentials from direct electrical stimula-tion). We further demonstrate that haemodynamic FC in the awake brain is better captured by meta-analytic co-activation across cognitive operations, than by the mere similarity of regions’ blood perfusion. Finally, the finding of reduced contribution from the network of cognitively-relevant co-activation replicates not only when using an alternative meta-analytic approach (BrainMap), but also when defining cognitive similarity in terms of sim-ilar subjective experiences elicited by direct intracranial electrical stimulation: bypassing the use of fMRI alto-gether, and ensuring that our results are not driven by any modality bias but rather by the cognitive similarity that NeuroSynth and intracranial stimulation both cap-ture. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

> DISCUSSION

Here, we investigated the relationship between spon-taneous haemodynamic networks (functional connectiv-ity) and other anatomical and functional networks [24], in the awake healthy brain and across pharmacological and pathological perturbations of consciousness. The present findings are two-fold. First, we show that on-going cognition is the dominant predictor of how brain regions spontaneously synchronise on a timescale of sec-onds. The network of cognitively relevant co-activations from NeuroSynth meta-analysis is by far the main con-tributor for predicting the fMRI functional connectivity of the human brain. While the structural connectome and molecular architecture of genes and receptors also make notable contributions in the order of 10% each, in line with their well established univariate relation-ships with FC [26, 27, 36, 51, 79], nonetheless cognitive co-activation alone accounts for equal or more variance than all the other seven structural and functional net-works combined. This finding is reproducible across all datasets, and it is also highly stable over time. Second, we find that the predominance of cognitively-relevant co-activations is systematically reduced across pathological and pharmacological perturbations of consciousness, in-cluding disorders of consciousness (due to cardiac arrest or traumatic injury), but also anaesthesia with propo-fol, sevoflurane, or a high dose of ketamine that ren-dered participants unresponsive and disconnected from the environment. This effect is consistently accompanied by increased contributions from networks of metabolic co-fluctuation and gene and receptor expression similar-ity. The result is a coherent pattern of increases and decreases in the relative contributions of structural and functional networks to FC. It is an implicit assumption underpinning rs-fMRI re-search that synchronous fluctuations should indicate that two regions are involved in the same cognitive functions: hence the name of ‘functional’ connectivity. This assump-tion found support in early studies indicating that even at ‘rest’, FC is not random, instead recapitulating task-induced co-activations [11, 13–15]. However, it is also widely observed that FC retains some structure even dur-ing sleep or anaesthesia, when cognition is absent, and is partly determined by the relative distance and physical connectivity between regions, as well as their molecular and cytoarchitectonic profiles [26, 27]. Previous studies have not directly compared these different accounts of FC. Here, we used dominance analysis to arbitrate be-tween these two contraposed accounts of haemodynamic functional connectivity. Results consistently indicate that the network of meta-analytic co-activations is the most dominant predictor of FC—eclipsing the contributions of spatial distance or even physical connectivity, and also blood perfusion (which is measured using the same imaging modality). The network of meta-analytic co-activations reflects which regions are consistently in-volved in the same cognitive operations—such as atten-tion, memory, emotion or language. It identifies the macroscale circuits that support different facets of cog-nition in the human brain, indicating sameness of func-tion. In other words, to know whether regions i and j

will exhibit synchronous haemodynamics, the most rele-vant piece of information is how consistently i and j are jointly recruited across the spectrum of human cognition. While dominance analysis does not establish that ongo-ing cognition causally determines FC, the present report indicates that regions’ cognitive co-activation is up to 10 times more important as a predictor of their FC than knowing how close the two regions are in space, and up to 5 times more important than knowing whether they are directly monosynaptically connected. Notably, the predictors of coordinated haemodynamics included coordinated electrodynamics from MEG [45], and coordinated metabolic activity from FDG-PET [41]. One might have expected these modalities to be the most relevant predictors of BOLD FC, because they reflect the same kind of process: synchronous activity over time, in the absence of any task. However, it is worth noting that the three modalities differ substantially not only in terms of what signals they reflect, but also in terms of temporal resolution, spanning several orders of magni-tude: from millisecond (MEG neurophysiology) to 1-2s (fMRI haemodynamics) and approximately 15s (glucose consumption from FDG-PET). Among them, we specu-late that fMRI may occupy a privileged timescale for cap-turing spontaneous cognition in the resting state. Intu-itively, one’s internal monologue is certainly faster than FDG-PET’s 15s, but for many purposes it may be slower than the millisecond-level timescale where M/EEG ex-cels. Indeed, the present results remained robust regard-less of the chosen MEG frequency. This line of argu-ment suggests that although electrophysiology remains the undisputed gold standard for capturing the brain’s re-actions to external stimuli, and for examining the broad-est range of temporal scales [80], fMRI may be well-suited to capturing ongoing, internally-driven cognition. This would be consistent with the present evidence that haemodynamic FC bears little resemblance to either elec-trodynamic or metabolic similarity after other modalities have been accounted for, and is instead closely related to regions’ co-involvement across cognitive functions. Crucially, we also replicated results about cognitive co-activations using an entirely different data modal-ity: similarity of subjective experiences elicited by direct intracranial electrical stimulation [73], as opposed to meta-analytic aggregation from the fMRI literature. This drastically different approach provided fully consistent results with the main NeuroSynth analysis, demonstrat-ing that the present results do not pertain to a specific modality (fMRI) but rather to regions’ joint recruitment across cognitive operations. Convergent evidence comes from the control analysis with blood perfusion, which is outperformed by meta-analytic co-activation as a predic-tor of haemodynamic FC. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 Although a decrease in the relative contribution of cognitively-relevant co-activations necessitates some in-crease in the relative contributions of other predictors, such increase could take many forms. For example, dif-ferent predictors could increase their contributions het-erogeneously across individuals, which would not pro-duce a statistically significant increase at the group level. Or a different predictor could increase its contribution in each dataset, which would produce a statistically signif-icant increase, but without manifesting as a consistent pattern across different datasets. Alternatively, each pre-dictor could increase its contribution in approximately equal amounts. Again such a scenario would not be in line with the present observation that increases are both statistically significant within datasets, and consis-tent across datasets in terms of which predictors are in-volved. Therefore, the present results of consistent in-creases in the contribution of specific networks cannot be simply discounted as a side-effect of the reduced con-tribution of NeuroSynth meta-analytic patterns. The present account of functional connectivity being shaped by ongoing cognition is further corroborated by the results that we provide about anaesthesia and dis-orders of consciousness. Both anaesthesia and DOC are characterised not only by behavioural unresponsiveness, but also by either the complete cessation of cognition due to unconsciousness, or its disconnection from the goings-on in the external environment. In each of these cases, brain regions cease to coordinate their activity in a manner that is consistent with the cognitive operations of the healthy brain. Instead, we find greater contribu-tions from SC and molecular architecture (genes and re-ceptors), as well as metabolic similarity. The exception is ketamine, where in accordance with previous findings [71] we do not observe an increased contribution of SC– possibly because participants’ consciousness was discon-nected from the environment, but not altogether abol-ished. The traditional account for the increased coupling between FC and SC observed under loss of conscious-ness [17, 18, 21, 81] is that the brain loses the flexibility to visit functional configurations beyond the dictates of anatomical connectivity. The present results add an im-portant caveat. It is not just any functional configuration that becomes less accessible: rather, the brain ceases to spontaneously self-organise according to cognitively rele-vant functional patterns. In addition to this decoupling between FC and cogni-tion, we also see that increased structure-function cou-pling between SC and FC is not the full story. Rather, multiple additional aspects of brain anatomy increase their hold on FC. Specifically, we consistently observed greater contributions of gene and receptor co-expression. Neurotransmitter receptors govern the responsiveness of neurons to neuromodulatory influences, and gene ex-pression shapes the cellular and molecular composition of each region. Together, these properties are major de-terminants of local circuit dynamics. It is therefore un-surprising that regions with similar local circuitry, at-tuned to the same neuromodulatory influences, should exhibit time-locked fluctuations in their activity. Indeed, under perturbed consciousness spontaneous haemody-namics also become more in line with the similarity of re-gions’ metabolic demands, which are likely to be largely driven by intrinsic cytoarchitecture, in the absence of specific cognitive demands imposed on a region. Altogether, by considering a broader range of struc-tural and functional networks across different perturba-tions of consciousness we can see that increased coupling with the SC is indeed observed (except for ketamine anaesthesia) in accordance with prior literature, but it is not the full story. Rather, contextualising BOLD FC with respect to multimodal anatomical and functional net-works of the human brain reveals additional, consistent reconfigurations across pathological and pharmacologi-cal perturbations of consciousness. The present approach complements recent efforts that used multiple modalities for each DOC patient, including functional and diffusion MRI but also FDG-PET and electrophysiology, showing the added diagnostic and prognostic value of additional modalities [63]. Here we used instead a single modal-ity per individual (fMRI), using multiple modalities to interpret it. Future work may seek to combine the two approaches, using patient-specific multimodal networks to characterise patient-specific BOLD FC. There are a number of limitations that should be borne in mind when interpreting the results. All networks are obtained from different populations of varying ages, sex ratios, handedness, and sample size (e.g., only 6 donors for gene expression [52], and one donor for his-tology [62])—which is inevitable since the histology and gene expression datasets are both post-mortem. Sub-cortical regions are not included in the present anal-ysis, due to notable cortical-subcortical differences for the receptor data [38], and outright unavailability for the electrical stimulation and electrophysiology datasets [45, 73]. However, future work should seek ways to ex-tend the present results to the subcortex, since structures such as the thalamus, basal ganglia, and brainstem all play prominent roles in the mechanisms of anaesthesia and disorders of consciousness [82–92]. Each dataset also comes with its own specific limitations including in-stances of false positives and negatives in diffusion trac-tography [93], nonspecific binding for some PET trac-ers [94], and heterogeneous levels of signal-to-noise ra-tio across all imaging types [24]. Spatial and tempo-ral resolutions also vary. Results may therefore be in-fluenced by differences in how the data are acquired. The functionally defined Schaefer atlas [95] used for all main analyses may reflect functional networks (e.g., metabolic connectivity, electrophysiological connectivity, meta-analytic activation from fMRI) better than anatom-ical and molecular networks. We sought to mitigate these challenges by running extensive sensitivity analy-ses, including use of a different parcellation (Desikan-Killiany [75], which is anatomically defined). We also replicated our results using different data modalities: in-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

11 stead of automated meta-analysis of task-fMRI studies with NeuroSynth, we used expert-curated meta-analysis with BrainMap [96], and an entirely different modality, intracranial electrical stimulation [73]; instead of mi-croarray gene expression we used RNA-seq [52]; and in-stead of diffusion tractography for revealing anatomical connections, we used cortico-cortical evoked potentials from the F-TRACT database [77]. The anaesthesia and DOC datasets are also heterogeneous, being acquired at different sites and with different acquisition parameters [66–68]. We sought to mitigate this concern by using uniform procedures for preprocessing and denoising, to ensure consistency. The fact that we found consistent re-sults despite this heterogeneity is also a testament to the robustness of the present findings. Altogether, this work combined multimodal and multi-scale perspectives on structure-function relationships be-tween cortical connectivity networks, including struc-tural connectivity and geometry but also gene expres-sion, receptor density, cytoarchitecture, electrodynam-ics at different frequencies, slow metabolic expenditure, and meta-analytic activation of cognitive patterns. We demonstrated that ongoing cognition is the dominant predictor of inter-regional fMRI synchrony at rest, and that the contribution of cognitive co-activations to FC is systematically reduced when cognition is abolished by pathological and pharmacological perturbations of con-sciousness. 

> MATERIALS AND METHODS Haemodynamic connectivity datasets
> Sevoflurane anaesthesia dataset

The sevoflurane data included here have been pub-lished before [67], and we refer the reader to the origi-nal publication for details. The ethics committee of the medical school of the Technische Universitat Munchen (Munchen, Germany) approved the current study, which was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from volunteers at least 48 h before the study session. Twenty healthy adult men (20 to 36 years of age; mean, 26 years) were recruited through campus notices and per-sonal contact, and compensated for their participation in the study. Before inclusion in the study, detailed infor-mation was provided about the protocol and risks, and medical history was reviewed to assess any previous neu-rologic or psychiatric disorder. A focused physical exam-ination was performed, and a resting electrocardiogram was recorded. Further exclusion criteria were the follow-ing: physical status other than American Society of Anes-thesiologists physical status I, chronic intake of medica-tion or drugs, hardness of hearing or deafness, absence of fluency in German, known or suspected disposition to malignant hyperthermia, acute hepatic porphyria, his-tory of halothane hepatitis, obesity with a body mass in-dex more than 30 kg/m2, gastrointestinal disorders with a disposition for gastroesophageal regurgitation, known or suspected difficult airway, and presence of metal im-plants. Data acquisition took place between June and December 2013. Sevoflurane concentrations were chosen so that par-ticipants tolerated artificial ventilation (reached at 2.0 vol %) and that burst-suppression (BS) was reached in all participants (around 4.4 vol %). To make group compar-isons feasible, an intermediate concentration of 3.0 vol %

was also used. In the MRI scanner, participants were in a resting state with eyes closed for 700s. Since EEG data were simultaneously acquired during MRI scan-ning [67] (though they are not analysed in the present study), visual online inspection of the EEG was used to verify that participants did not fall asleep during the pre-anaesthesia baseline scan. Sevoflurane mixed with oxygen was administered via a tight-fitting facemask using an fMRI-compatible anaesthesia machine (Fabius Tiro, Drager, Germany). Standard American Society of Anesthesiologists monitoring was performed: concentra-tions of sevoflurane, oxygen and carbon dioxide, were monitored using a cardiorespiratory monitor (DatexaS, General electric, USA). After administering an end-tidal sevoflurane concentration (etSev) of 0.4 vol % for 5 min, sevoflurane concentration was increased in a stepwise fashion by 0.2 vol % every 3 min until the participant be-came unconscious, as judged by the loss of responsive-ness (LOR) to the repeatedly spoken command “squeeze my hand” two consecutive times. Sevoflurane concentra-tion was then increased to reach an end-tidal concentra-tion of approximately 3 vol %. When clinically indicated, ventilation was managed by the physician and a laryn-geal mask suitable for fMRI (I-gel, Intersurgical, United Kingdom) was inserted. The fraction of inspired oxy-gen was then set at 0.8, and mechanical ventilation was adjusted to maintain end-tidal carbon dioxide at steady concentrations of 33 ± 1.71 mmHg during BS, 34 ± 1.12 

mmHg during 3 vol %, and 33 ±1.49 mmHg during 2 vol %

(throughout this article, mean ± SD). Norepinephrine was given by continuous infusion ( 0.1 ± 0.01 μg kg-1 min-1) through an intravenous catheter in a vein on the dor-sum of the hand, to maintain the mean arterial blood pressure close to baseline values (baseline, 96 ± 9.36 

mmHg; BS, 88 ± 7.55 mmHg; 3 vol %, 88 ± 8.4 mmHg; 2 vol %, 89 ±9.37 mmHg; follow-up, 98 ±9.41 mmHg). After insertion of the laryngeal mask airway, sevoflurane con-centration was gradually increased until the EEG showed burst-suppression with suppression periods of at least 1,000 ms and about 50 % suppression of electrical activ-ity (reached at 4.34 ± 0.22 vol %), which is characteris-tic of deep anaesthesia. At that point, another 700s of electroencephalogram and fMRI was recorded. Further 700s of data were acquired at steady end-tidal sevoflu-rane concentrations of 3 and 2 vol %, respectively (cor-responding to Ramsay scale level 6, the deepest), each after an equilibration time of 15 min. In a final step, et-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

12 Sev was reduced to two times the concentration at LOR. However, most of the participants moved or did not tol-erate the laryngeal mask any more under this condition: therefore, this stage was not included in the analysis. Sevoflurane administration was then terminated, and the scanner table was slid out of the MRI scanner to monitor post-anaesthetic recovery. The participants were man-ually ventilated until spontaneous ventilation returned. The laryngeal mask was removed as soon as the patient opened his mouth on command. The physician regu-larly asked the participant to squeeze their hand: re-covery of responsiveness was noted to occur as soon as the command was followed. Fifteen minutes after the time of recovery of responsiveness, the Brice interview was administered to assess for awareness during sevoflu-rane exposure; the interview was repeated on the phone the next day. After a total of 45 min of recovery time, another resting-state combined fMRI-EEG scan was ac-quired (with eyes closed, as for the baseline scan). When participants were alert, oriented, cooperative, and physi-ologically stable, they were taken home by a family mem-ber or a friend appointed in advance. Although the original study acquired both functional MRI (fMRI) and electroencephalographic (EEG) data, in the present work we only considered the fMRI data. Data acquisition was carried out on a 3-Tesla magnetic resonance imaging scanner (Achieva Quasar Dual 3.0T 16CH, The Netherlands) with an eight-channel, phased-array head coil. The data were collected using a gradient echo planar imaging sequence (echo time = 30 ms, rep-etition time (TR) = 1.838 s, flip angle = 75 deg , field of view = 220 × 220 mm2, matrix = 72 × 72, 32 slices, slice thickness = 3 mm, and 1 mm interslice gap; 700-s acquisition time, resulting in 350 functional volumes). The anatomical scan was acquired before the functional scan using a T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence with 240 ×

240 × 170 voxels (1 × 1 × 1 mm voxel size) covering the whole brain. A total of 16 volunteers completed the full protocol and were included in our analyses; one par-ticipant was excluded due to high motion, leaving N=15 for analysis. 

> Propofol anaesthesia dataset

The propofol data were collected between May and November 2014 at the Robarts Research Institute, West-ern University, London, Ontario (Canada), and have been published before [66, 97]. The study received eth-ical approval from the Health Sciences Research Ethics Board and Psychology Research Ethics Board of West-ern University (Ontario, Canada). Healthy volunteers (n=19) were recruited (18–40 years; 13 males). Vol-unteers were right-handed, native English speakers, and had no history of neurological disorders. In accordance with relevant ethical guidelines, each volunteer provided written informed consent, and received monetary com-pensation for their time. Due to equipment malfunction or physiological impediments to anaesthesia in the scan-ner, data from n=3 participants (1 male) were excluded from analyses, leaving a total n=16 for analysis. Resting-state fMRI data were acquired at different propofol levels: no sedation (Awake), Deep anaesthe-sia (corresponding to Ramsay score of 5) and also dur-ing post-anaesthetic recovery. As previously reported [66], for each condition fMRI acquisition began after two anaesthesiologists and one anaesthesia nurse inde-pendently assessed Ramsay level in the scanning room. The anaesthesiologists and the anaesthesia nurse could not be blinded to experimental condition, since part of their role involved determining the participants’ level of anaesthesia. Note that the Ramsay score is designed for critical care patients, and therefore participants did not receive a score during the Awake condition before propo-fol administration: rather, they were required to be fully awake, alert and communicating appropriately. To pro-vide a further, independent evaluation of participants’ level of responsiveness, they were asked to perform two tasks: a test of verbal memory recall, and a computer-based auditory target-detection task. Wakefulness was also monitored using an infrared camera placed inside the scanner. Propofol was administered intravenously us-ing an AS50 auto syringe infusion pump (Baxter Health-care, Singapore); an effect-site/plasma steering algo-rithm combined with the computer-controlled infusion pump was used to achieve step-wise sedation incre-ments, followed by manual adjustments as required to reach the desired target concentrations of propofol ac-cording to the TIVA Trainer (European Society for In-travenous Anaeesthesia, eurosiva.eu) pharmacokinetic simulation program. This software also specified the blood concentrations of propofol, following the Marsh 3-compartment model, which were used as targets for the pharmacokinetic model providing target-controlled infusion. After an initial propofol target effect-site con-centration of 0.6 μg mL −1, concentration was gradually increased by increments of 0.3 μg mL −1, and Ramsay score was assessed after each increment: a further incre-ment occurred if the Ramsay score was lower than 5. The mean estimated effect-site and plasma propofol concen-trations were kept stable by the pharmacokinetic model delivered via the TIVA Trainer infusion pump. Ramsay level 5 was achieved when participants stopped respond-ing to verbal commands, were unable to engage in con-versation, and were rousable only to physical stimula-tion. Once both anaesthesiologists and the anaesthe-sia nurse all agreed that Ramsay sedation level 5 had been reached, and participants stopped responding to both tasks, data acquisition was initiated. The mean esti-mated effect-site propofol concentration was 2.48 (1.82-3.14) μg mL-1, and the mean estimated plasma propofol concentration was 2.68 (1.92- 3.44) μg mL-1. Mean to-tal mass of propofol administered was 486.58 (373.30-599.86) mg. These values of variability are typical for the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of propofol. Oxygen was titrated to maintain SpO2 above 96 %. At 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 Ramsay 5 level, participants remained capable of sponta-neous cardiovascular function and ventilation. However, the sedation procedure did not take place in a hospital setting; therefore, intubation during scanning could not be used to ensure airway security during scanning. Con-sequently, although two anaesthesiologists closely mon-itored each participant, scanner time was minimised to ensure return to normal breathing following deep seda-tion. No state changes or movement were noted dur-ing the deep sedation scanning for any of the partici-pants included in the study. Propofol was discontinued following the deep anaesthesia scan, and participants reached level 2 of the Ramsay scale approximately 11 minutes afterwards, as indicated by clear and rapid re-sponses to verbal commands. This corresponds to the “recovery” period. As previously reported [66], once in the scanner participants were instructed to relax with closed eyes, without falling asleep. Resting-state func-tional MRI in the absence of any tasks was acquired for 8 minutes for each participant. A further scan was also acquired during auditory presentation of a plot-driven story through headphones (5-minute long). Participants were instructed to listen while keeping their eyes closed. The present analysis focuses on the resting-state data only; the story scan data have been published separately [98] and will not be discussed further here. As previously reported [66], MRI scanning was per-formed using a 3-Tesla Siemens Tim Trio scanner (32-channel coil), and 256 functional volumes (echo-planar images, EPI) were collected from each participant, with the following parameters: slices = 33, with 25 % inter-slice gap; resolution = 3mm isotropic; TR = 2000ms; TE = 30ms; flip angle = 75 degrees; matrix size = 64 ×

64. The order of acquisition was interleaved, bottom-up. Anatomical scanning was also performed, acquir-ing a high-resolution T1- weighted volume (32-channel coil, 1mm isotropic voxel size) with a 3D MPRAGE se-quence, using the following parameters: TA = 5min, TE = 4.25ms, 240 × 256 matrix size, 9 degrees flip angle [66]. 

> Ketamine anaesthesia dataset

The anaesthetic ketamine data used here have been published previously [68], and we refer the reader to the original publication for further details. The orig-inal study was approved by the ethics committee of the Medical School of the University of Liège (Univer-sity Hospital, Liège, Belgium) and registered at EudraCT (2010-023016-13). Fourteen right-handed volunteers were recruited via advertisements on an Internet forum (5 women; median age [range], 25 [19–31] years). Each participant provided written informed consent and un-derwent a medical interview and physical examination prior to participation. Volunteers were instructed to fast for at least 6 h from solids and 2 h from liquids prior to the experimen-tal session. After acquisition of structural MRI images, participants were removed from the MRI scanner and fitted with 64 scalp electroencephalogram (EEG) elec-trodes to enable simultaneous EEG–fMRI recording. In the present study, only functional MRI data were ana-lyzed. An 18-gauge intravenous catheter (BD Insyte-W; Becton Dickinson Infusion Therapy Systems Inc., USA) was inserted into a vein of the left forearm and in-fused with normal saline at a rate of 20 ml/h. This line was used for ketamine infusion and potential adminis-tration of rescue medications. Additionally, a 20-gauge arterial catheter (Arrow International Inc., USA) was placed in the left radial artery under strict sterile con-ditions after local anesthesia with 3 ml of 1% lidocaine. The arterial catheter was connected to a monitoring set (TruWave, Edwards Lifesciences, Dominican Republic) for arterial blood sampling and gas analysis. Standard MRI-compatible anesthesia monitoring equipment (Mag-nitude 3150M; Invivo Research Inc., USA) was used to continuously record electrocardiogram, heart rate, blood pressure, pulse oximetry (SpO 2), and respiratory rate throughout scanning and recovery. Supplemental oxy-gen was delivered at 5 l/min via a loosely fitting plastic facemask, while spontaneous breathing was maintained. One certified anesthesiologist and one neurologist were present throughout the experiment. After all equipment and monitoring devices were set up, volunteers were po-sitioned comfortably in the MRI tray in a supine position to minimize discomfort or painful stimulation. All partic-ipants wore earplugs to reduce scanner noise and head-phones to allow communication with investigators. One investigator remained in the MRI scan room at all times. Ketamine was administered using a computer-controlled intravenous infusion system operated via a dedicated laptop computer. A 50-ml syringe was filled with normal saline containing racemic ketamine (Ketalar, Pfizer Ltd., Turkey) at a concentration of 10 mg/ml. The infusion pump was driven by the Domino pharmacoki-netic model, which has demonstrated acceptable predic-tive performance. The system adjusted infusion rates to target precise plasma and effect-site ketamine con-centrations based on biometric parameters. Following each change in target concentration, a 5-min equilibra-tion period was allowed to ensure compartmental equi-libration. Sedation depth was assessed using the Ram-say Scale (RS) and the University of Michigan Seda-tion Scale (UMSS), immediately before and after each fMRI acquisition. Volunteers were instructed to squeeze the investigator’s hand forcefully, with the command re-peated twice. An investigator remained inside the MRI room throughout the experiment to ensure close moni-toring. An initial fMRI acquisition was performed with-out ketamine infusion (awake state, W1). Ketamine in-fusion was then initiated, and target concentration was increased in steps of 0.5 μg/ml until light sedation was achieved (RS 3–4 or UMSS 1–2; S1). After the 5-min equilibration period, an identical fMRI acquisition se-quence was performed. Target concentration was sub-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

14 sequently increased in additional steps of 0.5 μg/ml un-til deep sedation was reached (RS 5–6 or UMSS 4; S2), followed by another identical acquisition sequence. Due to ketamine’s long elimination half-life and to limit time spent in the scanner, the order of clinical states was not randomized, and a recovery condition was not acquired. After completion of data acquisition, ketamine infusion was stopped and participants were removed from the scanner for recovery. The occurrence of dreaming dur-ing ketamine infusion was assessed via a telephone in-terview conducted after the experimental session [68]. In the present analysis, only the awake and deep seda-tion conditions were considered. MRI data were acquired on a 3 T Siemens Allegra scanner (Siemens AG, Germany) using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with 32 slices (repetition time = 2460 ms; echo time = 40 ms; field of view = 220 mm; voxel size = 3.45 × 3.45 × 3 mm; matrix size = 

64 ×64 ×32 ). For each volunteer and condition, 300 func-tional volumes were acquired. A high-resolution struc-tural T1-weighted image was obtained at the beginning of the experiment for coregistration with functional data. Six participants were excluded from further analysis due to excessive agitation and movement (5 participants) or voluntary withdrawal (1 participant), leaving data from eight participants for final analysis [68]. 

> Cambridge DOC dataset

The disorders of consciousness (DOC) patient data used in this study have been published previously. For clarity and consistency of reporting, where applicable we use the same wording as in our earlier publications us-ing these data [66, 99]. Briefly, 71 patients with DOC were recruited from specialised long-term care centres between January 2010 and December 2015. Ethical approval was provided by the National Research Ethics Service (National Health Service, UK; LREC reference 99/391). Patients were eligible for inclusion if they had a di-agnosis of a chronic disorder of consciousness, written informed consent was obtained from their legal repre-sentative, and they could be safely transported to Adden-brooke’s Hospital (Cambridge, UK). Exclusion criteria in-cluded any medical condition rendering participation un-safe, as judged by clinical personnel blinded to the spe-cific aims of the study, or any contraindication to the MRI environment (e.g. non-MRI-safe implants). Patients were also excluded if they had significant pre-existing mental health problems or insufficient fluency in English prior to their injury. Following admission to Addenbrooke’s Hospital, each patient underwent a comprehensive programme of clini-cal and neuroimaging assessments, including task-based, resting-state, and anatomical MRI scans. Patients spent a total of five days in hospital, including arrival and de-parture days. Neuroimaging data were acquired at the Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre (Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, UK), and all prescribed medications were maintained throughout scanning. The Coma Recovery Scale–Revised (CRS-R) was ad-ministered at least once daily throughout each patient’s admission. Patients who did not exhibit behavioural evi-dence of awareness at any assessment were classified as being in an Unresponsive Wakefulness Syndrome (UWS). Patients were classified as being in a Minimally Con-scious State (MCS) if they demonstrated behavioural ev-idence of awareness, such as simple automatic motor be-haviours (e.g. scratching or pulling bed sheets), visual fixation or pursuit, or localisation to noxious stimulation [100, 101]. Due to the limited sample size, MCS patients were not further subdivided into MCS − and MCS +.Because the present study focused on whole-brain properties, sufficient brain coverage was required. Con-sistent with our previous studies [66, 99], patients were excluded prior to analysis if an expert neuroanatomist blinded to diagnosis judged that there was excessive fo-cal brain damage (greater than one third of one hemi-sphere), if brain damage resulted in suboptimal segmen-tation or spatial normalisation, or if excessive head mo-tion was observed during scanning (exceeding 3 mm translation or 3 ◦ rotation). Forty-one patients were excluded due to excessive brain damage or distortion preventing satisfactory segmentation and normalisation, and a further eight were excluded due to excessive head motion. The final sample comprised 22 adult patients (14 males, 8 females; age range 17–70 years; mean time post-injury: 13 months), including 10 patients diagnosed with UWS and 12 with MCS due to acquired brain injury [66]. Resting-state fMRI data were acquired for 10 min (300 volumes; TR = 2000 ms) using a Siemens Trio 3 T scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). Functional im-ages were acquired using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with 32 slices and the following parameters: voxel size 3 × 3 × 3.75 mm, TR = 2000 ms, TE = 30 ms, and flip angle = 78 ◦. High-resolution anatomical images were acquired using a T1-weighted MPRAGE sequence (TR = 2300 ms; TE = 2.47 ms; 150 slices; voxel size 

1 × 1 × 1 mm) [66]. 

> Paris DOC dataset

The Pairs DOC dataset has been published before, and we refer to the original articles for full details [18, 63]. This research was approved by the ethical committee of the Pitie-Salpetriere under the French label of ‘routine care research’ (Comité de Protection des Personnes no 2013-A01385-40, Ile de France 1, Paris, France under the code ‘Recherche en soins courants’, protocol num-bers NEURO-DoC/HAO-006/20130409 and M-NEURO-DoC/NCT04534777) [18, 63]. Briefly, in this DOC co-hort, three MRI modalities were acquired: anatomical T1-weighted MRI (aMRI) and resting-state functional 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15 MRI (RS-fMRI), with functional scans lasting approxi-mately five minutes. Two distinct acquisition protocols were used to collect structural and functional images. In the first protocol, imaging was performed using a 3 T General Electric Signa system (GE HealthCare Technologies Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Resting-state fMRI data consisted of T2 ∗-weighted whole-brain images ac-quired using a gradient-echo echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence in axial orientation (200 volumes, 48 slices, slice thickness = 3 mm, TR/TE = 2400/30 ms, voxel size = 3.4375 × 3.4375 × 3.4375 mm, flip angle = 90 ◦, field of view (FOV) = 220 mm 2). A T1-weighted anatom-ical image was acquired during the same session us-ing a magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition gradi-ent echo (MPRAGE) sequence (154 slices, slice thick-ness = 1.2 mm, TR/TE = 7.112/3.084 ms, voxel size = 

1 × 1 × 1 mm, flip angle = 15 ◦). In the second protocol, functional data were acquired using a 3 T Siemens Skyra system (Siemens Healthineers, Erlangen, Germany) with a gradient-echo EPI sequence (180 volumes, 62 slices, slice thickness = 2.5 mm, TR/TE = 2000/30 ms, voxel size = 2 × 2 × 2 mm, flip angle = 90 ◦, FOV = 240 mm 2,multiband factor = 2). Structural T1-weighted MPRAGE images were also collected in the same session (208 slices, slice thickness = 1.2 mm, TR/TE = 1800/2.35 ms, voxel size = 0.85 × 0.85 × 0.85 mm, flip angle = 8◦). Patients who had received medications known to signif-icantly alter vigilance levels (e.g. propofol or benzodi-azepines) prior to scanning were excluded from the fMRI analyses [18, 63]. 

> Test-retest dataset

The test-retest data included here have been published before [99, 102]. Briefly, right-handed healthy partic-ipants ( N = 22 ; age range, 19–57 years; mean age, 35.0 years; SD, 11.2; female-to-male ratio, 9:13) were recruited via advertisements in the Cambridge area and received financial compensation for participation. The study was approved by the Cambridgeshire 2 Research Ethics Committee (LREC 08/H0308/246), and all partic-ipants provided written informed consent prior to inclu-sion. Exclusion criteria included a National Adult Read-ing Test (NART) score < 70 , Mini-Mental State Exami-nation (MMSE) score < 23 , left-handedness, history of drug or alcohol abuse, history of psychiatric or neuro-logical disorders, contraindications to MRI scanning, use of medications that could affect cognitive performance or that were prescribed for depression, and any physi-cal impairment that could interfere with completion of the experimental procedures. The study comprised two experimental visits separated by 2–4 weeks. During each visit, resting-state functional MRI data were acquired for 5 min 20 s using a Siemens Trio 3 T scanner (Siemens, Erlangen, Germany). Functional im-ages were collected using an echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence with the following parameters: repetition time (TR) = 2000 ms; echo time (TE) = 30 ms; flip angle = 78 ◦; field of view (FOV) = 192 × 192 mm 2; in-plane resolution = 3.0 × 3.0 mm; 32 slices with slice thickness of 3.0 mm and an inter-slice gap of 0.75 mm. A high-resolution three-dimensional structural image was also acquired using a magnetization-prepared rapid acquisi-tion gradient echo (MPRAGE) sequence with the follow-ing parameters: TR = 2300 ms; TE = 2.98 ms; flip angle = 9◦; FOV = 256 × 256 mm 2. Task-based fMRI data were additionally collected and have been analyzed previously to address separate experimental questions [99, 102]. Eighteen participants had usable data for both resting-state fMRI sessions and were included in the present analysis. 

> FMRI preprocessing and denoising

For the Cambridge DOC, test-retest, and anaesthesia datasets, we applied a standard preprocessing pipeline in accordance with our previous publications with anaes-thesia and DOC data [66]. Preprocessing was performed using the CONN toolbox, version 17f (CONN; http: //www.nitrc.org/projects/conn) [103], implemented in MATLAB 2016a. The pipeline involved the following steps: removal of the first 10s, to achieve steady-state magnetization; motion correction; slice-timing correc-tion; identification of outlier volumes for subsequent scrubbing by means of the quality assurance/artifact rejection software art (http://www.nitrc.org/projects/ artifact_detect); normalisation to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI-152) standard space (2 mm isotropic re-sampling resolution), using the segmented grey matter image from each participant’s T1-weighted anatomical image, together with an a priori grey matter template. Denoising was also performed using the CONN tool-box, using the same approach as in our previous pub-lications with pharmaco-MRI datasets [66]. Pharmaco-logical agents can induce alterations in physiological pa-rameters (heart rate, breathing rate, motion) or neu-rovascular coupling. The anatomical CompCor (aCom-pCor) method removes physiological fluctuations by ex-tracting principal components from regions unlikely to be modulated by neural activity; these components are then included as nuisance regressors [104]. Following this approach, five principal components were extracted from white matter and cerebrospinal fluid signals (using individual tissue masks obtained from the T1-weighted structural MRI images) [103]; and regressed out from the functional data together with six individual-specific realignment parameters (three translations and three ro-tations) as well as their first-order temporal derivatives; followed by scrubbing of outliers identified by ART, using Ordinary Least Squares regression [103]. Finally, the de-noised BOLD signal timeseries were linearly detrended and band-pass filtered to eliminate both low-frequency drift effects and high-frequency noise, thus retaining fre-quencies between 0.008 and 0.09 Hz. The step of global 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16 signal regression (GSR) has received substantial atten-tion in the literature as a denoising method [105–107]. However, recent work has demonstrated that the global signal contains behaviourally relevant information [108] and, crucially, information about states of consciousness, across pharmacological and pathological perturbations [109]. Therefore, in line with ours and others’ previous studies, here we avoided GSR in favour of the aComp-Cor denoising procedure, which is among those recom-mended. Finally, denoised BOLD signals were parcellated into 100 cortical regions-of-interest (ROIs) from the Schae-fer atlas [95]. We also replicated our results with the 68-ROI anatomical Desikan-Killiany cortical parcellation [110]. Functional connectivity was estimated for each individual and each condition, as the Pearson correla-tion between between pairs of denoised and parcellated BOLD timeseries. The Paris DOC dataset was processed as follows using 

fMRIPrep version 22.0.2. For participants with visible lesions on T1-weighted anatomical images, manual le-sion masks were created and provided as inputs to the preprocessing pipeline. For each BOLD run identified per subject (across all tasks and sessions), the follow-ing steps were applied. First, a reference volume and its skull-stripped version were generated using a custom 

fMRIPrep procedure. Head-motion parameters relative to the BOLD reference (rigid-body transformation matri-ces and the corresponding six rotation and translation parameters) were estimated prior to any spatiotempo-ral filtering using mcflirt (FSL 6.0.5.1; [111]). BOLD runs were slice-time corrected to 0.958 s (half of the slice acquisition range, 0–1.92 s) using 3dTshift from AFNI. The BOLD time series (including slice-time cor-rection when applied) were resampled into their origi-nal native space by applying the estimated head-motion correction transforms. These data are referred to as the preprocessed BOLD time series in native space. The BOLD reference image was co-registered to the T1-weighted (T1w) anatomical reference using mri_coreg 

(FreeSurfer), followed by flirt (FSL 6.0.5.1) employ-ing the boundary-based registration cost function. Co-registration was configured with six degrees of freedom. Several confounding time series were computed from the preprocessed BOLD data, including framewise displace-ment (FD), DVARS, and three global signals extracted from cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), white matter (WM), and whole-brain masks. FD and DVARS were computed for each functional run using Nipype implementations fol-lowing the definitions in [106]. Post-preprocessing steps included regression of 24 head-motion parameters as confounds, removal of the first four volumes, and temporal bandpass filtering (0.01–0.1 Hz). Physiological noise regressors were es-timated using component-based noise correction (aCom-pCor; [104]). Principal components were extracted af-ter high-pass filtering the preprocessed BOLD time series with a discrete cosine filter (128 s cutoff). For aCom-pCor, probabilistic masks of CSF, WM, and combined CSF+WM were generated in anatomical space. Unlike the original implementation by [104], masks were not eroded in BOLD space. Instead, voxels likely containing gray matter were excluded by subtracting a gray-matter partial-volume mask thresholded at 0.05, ensuring that components were not extracted from voxels containing even a minimal fraction of gray matter. These masks were then resampled into BOLD space and binarized at a threshold of 0.99, consistent with the original imple-mentation. Components were also estimated separately within CSF and WM masks. For each CompCor decom-position, the smallest number of components explaining at least 50% of variance within the corresponding nui-sance mask was retained; remaining components were discarded. Head-motion estimates were included in the confounds file, and confound time series derived from motion parameters and global signals were expanded to include temporal derivatives and quadratic terms [112]. Volumes exceeding thresholds of 0.5 mm FD or 1.5 stan-dardized DVARS were flagged as motion outliers. Addi-tional nuisance regressors were estimated using princi-pal component analysis of signal extracted from a thin band of voxels surrounding the brain boundary, follow-ing [113]. The denoised BOLD time series were resampled into standard space, yielding preprocessed BOLD data in MNI152NLin2009cAsym space. All resamplings were performed in a single interpolation step by composing all relevant transformations, including head-motion cor-rection, susceptibility distortion correction when avail-able, and co-registrations to anatomical and output spaces. Volumetric resampling was performed using 

antsApplyTransforms (ANTs) with Lanczos interpola-tion to minimize smoothing effects. Finally, denoised BOLD signals were parcellated into 100 cortical regions-of-interest (ROIs) from the Schaefer atlas [95]. We also replicated our results with the 68-ROI anatomical Desikan-Killiany cortical parcellation [110]. Functional connectivity was estimated for each indi-vidual and each condition, as the Pearson correlation be-tween between pairs of denoised and parcellated BOLD timeseries. Pearson correlation is not the only method for obtaining a network of functional connectivity between fMRI time-series (or indeed between electrophysiologi-cal or metabolic time-series). On the contrary, hundreds of statistical and information-theoretic relationships exist [10] and may highlight different relationships between regions. Here, we made the pragmatic choice of using Pearson correlation as the most widely used definition of functional connectivity, which also ensures methodolog-ical consistency with recent work using the same multi-modal brain networks [24]. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

17 

> Multimodal anatomical and functional brain networks
> Metabolic connectivity from dynamic FDG-PET

Metabolic connectivity indexes how similarly two cor-tical regions metabolize glucose over time and there-fore how similarly two cortical regions consume en-ergy [24]. Here we followed the same procedures as in [24]. Briefly, volumetric 4D PET images of [F 18 ]-fluordoxyglucose (FDG, a glucose analogue) tracer up-take over time were obtained from Jamadar et al. [114]. Specifically, 26 healthy participants (77% female, 18–23 years old) were recruited from the general population and underwent a 95 minute simultaneous MR-PET scan in a Siemens (Erlangen) Biograph 3-Tesla molecular MR scanner. Participants were positioned supine in the scan-ner bore with their head in a 16-channel radiofrequency head coil and were instructed to lie as still as possible with eyes open and think of nothing in particular. FDG (average dose 233 MBq) was infused over the course of the scan at a rate of 36 mL/h using a BodyGuard 323 MR-compatible infusion pump (Caesarea Medical Elec-tronics, Caesarea, Israel). Infusion onset was locked to the onset of the PET scan. This data has been validated and analyzed previously in [115, 116]. PET images were reconstructed and preprocessed ac-cording to [116]. Specifically, the 5700-second PET time-series for each subject was binned into 356 3D sinogram frames each of 16-second intervals. The at-tenuation for all required data was corrected via the pseudo-CT method [117]. Ordinary Poisson-Ordered Subset Expectation Maximization algorithm (3 itera-tions, 21 subsets) with point spread function correction was used to reconstruct 3D volumes from the sinogram frames. The reconstructed DICOM slices were converted to NIFTI format with size 344 ×344 ×127 (voxel size: 2.09 ×2.09 ×2.03 mm 3) for each volume. A 5 mm FWHM Gaussian postfilter was applied to each 3D volume. All 3D volumes were temporally concatenated to form a 4D (344 ×344 ×127 ×356) NIFTI volume. A guided motion correction method using simultaneously acquired MRI was applied to correct the motion during the PET scan. 225 16-second volumes were retained commencing for further analyses. Next, the 225 PET volumes were motion corrected (FSL MCFLIRT [111]) and the mean PET image was brain extracted and used to mask the 4D data. The fPET data were further processed using a spatiotemporal gradient filter to remove the accumulating effect of the radiotracer and other low-frequency components of the signal [118]. Finally, each time point of the PET volumet-ric time-series were registered to MNI152 template space using Advanced Normalization Tools in Python (ANTSpy, https://github.com/ANTsX/ANTsPy), parcellated to 100 cortical regions of the Schaefer atlas [95] (or 68 corti-cal regions according to the Desikan-Killiany atlas, for the robustness analyses) and time-series at pairs of cor-tical regions were correlated (Pearson’s r) to construct a metabolic connectivity matrix for each subject. A group-averaged metabolic connectome was obtained by aver-aging connectivity across subjects. 

> Neurophysiological connectivity from magnetoencephalogrphy

Electrophysiological connectivity was measured us-ing magnetoencephalography (MEG) recordings, which tracks the magnetic field produced by neural currents [24]. Resting state MEG data was acquired for n =33 unrelated healthy young adults (age range 22–35 years) from the Human Connectome Project (S900 re-lease [119]). The data includes resting state scans of approximately 6 minutes long and noise recording for all participants. MEG anatomical data and 3T structural MRI of all participants were also obtained for MEG pre-processing. The present MEG data was first processed and used by Hansen et al. [24], Shafiei et al. [45]. Rest-ing state MEG data was preprocessed using the open-source software, Brainstorm (https://neuroimage.usc. edu/brainstorm/ [120]), following the online tuto-rial for the HCP dataset (https://neuroimage.usc.edu/ brainstorm/Tutorials/HCP-MEG). MEG recordings were registered to individual structural MRI images before ap-plying the following preprocessing steps. First, notch fil-ters were applied at 60, 120, 180, 240, and 300 Hz, fol-lowed by a high-pass filter at 0.3 Hz to remove slow-wave and DC-offset artifacts. Next, bad channels from arti-facts (including heartbeats, eye blinks, saccades, muscle movements, and noisy segments) were removed using Signal-Space Projections (SSP). Pre-processed sensor-level data was used to construct a source estimation on HCP’s fsLR4k cortex surface for each participant. Head models were computed using overlapping spheres and data and noise covariance ma-trices were estimated from resting state MEG and noise recordings. Linearly constrained minimum variance (LCMV) beamformers were used to obtain the source ac-tivity for each participant. Data covariance regulariza-tion was performed and the estimated source variance was normalised by the noise covariance matrix to re-duce the effect of variable source depth. All eigenvalues smaller than the median eigenvalue of the data covari-ance matrix were replaced by the median. This helps avoid instability of data covariance inversion caused by the smallest eigenvalues and regularizes the data covari-ance matrix. Source orientations were constrained to be normal to the cortical surface at each of the 8 000 vertex locations on the cortical surface, then parcellated accord-ing to the Schaefer atlas [95] (or Desikan-Killiany atlas, for the robustness analyses). After preprocessing and parcellating the data, am-plitude envelope correlations were performed between time-series at each pair of brain regions, for six canonical frequency bands separately: delta (2–4 Hz), theta (5–7 Hz), alpha (8–12 Hz), beta (15–29 Hz), low gamma (30– 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

18 59 Hz), and high gamma (60–90 Hz). Amplitude enve-lope correlation is applied instead of directly correlating the time-series because of the high sampling rate ( 2034 .5

Hz) of the MEG recordings. An orthogonalization pro-cess was applied to correct for the spatial leakage effect by removing all shared zero-lag signals [121]. The com-posite electrophysiological connectivity matrix is the first principal component of all six connectivity matrices, as per [24]. 

> Co-perfusion networks from Arterial Spin Labelling

The blood perfusion data comes from arterial spin la-beling (ASL) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In this imaging technique, the magnetization of arterial blood in the neck is flipped (or “labeled”) using a train of short block radiofrequency pulses. Images of the brain con-taining the magnetic “label” are then acquired following a delay that allows the labeled blood to reach and per-fuse brain tissue (i.e., post-labeling delay; PLD). In addi-tion, a “control” image with no magnetization inversion is also acquired. The difference between the “label” im-ages and the “control” image is proportional to cerebral blood perfusion and is not affected by the spins. Through this imaging, arterial transit time (ATT) which represents the time it takes for labeled blood to reach brain tissue is also estimated [122, 123]. Here we include ASL data from a total of 1 305 partic-ipants in the HCP Lifespan studies ( 2.0 Release) [124– 126]. Specifically, data from 627 participants ( 337 fe-males) from HCP-D ( 5–22 years) and 678 participants (381 females) from HCP-A ( 36 –100 years) are included. All study procedures of the HCP protocol are approved by the Institutional Review Board at Washington Univer-sity in St. Louis (HCP-D IRB ID#: 201603135 ; HCP-A IRB ID#: 201603117 ). All HCP Lifespan imaging data is acquired using a 3.0 Tesla Prisma scanner (Siemens; Erlangen, Germany) and a 32 –channel head coil. In HCP Lifespan studies, ASL data acquisition is based on a pseudo-continuous arterial spin labeling (pCASL) and 

2D multiband (MB)-echo-planar imaging (EPI) sequence. Pseudo-continuous ASL data are acquired with labeling duration of 1 500 ms and five post-labeling delays of 200 

ms , 700 ms , 1 200 ms , 1 700 ms , and 2 200 ms , contain-ing 6, 6, 6, 10 , 15 control-label image pairs, respec-tively. To calibrate perfusion measurements into units of 

ml/100g/min , two PD-weighted M 0 calibration images (TR > 8s) are acquired at the end of the pCASL scan. For susceptibility distortion correction, two phase-encoding-reversed spin-echo images are also acquired. The ASL data preprocessing is conducted following the HCP ASL Pipeline available at https://github.com/ physimals/hcp-asl/ [123]. To run this pipeline we use QuNex platform (singularity container, version 0.99 .1)[127]. Briefly, raw ASL and calibration images are first registered to participant anatomical space. This regis-tration transform is merged with motion correction, sus-ceptibility distortion, and gradient distortion transforms and applied simultaneously to the raw ASL and calibra-tion images using the regtricks library. This approach minimizes repeated interpolations and thus reduces par-tial volume effects. Next, intensity bias and banding corrections are applied to the structurally-aligned ASL data. In the presence of head motion, voxels travel-ing between neighboring slices during the acquisition re-ceive differing intensity scaling during the banding cor-rections, which can lead to spurious signal after label-control subtraction. To address this effect, general lin-ear model (GLM)-based approach for motion-aware sub-traction of banded and background-suppressed ASL data, previously introduced by Suzuki et al. [128], is used. The subtracted time-series data is then used for perfusion es-timation. Cerebral blood perfusion and arterial transit time (ATT) are estimated using a variational Bayesian method via the oxford_asl script [129]. The aslrest 

Buxton model with cerebral blood perfusion, ATT and macrovascular components is used [130, 131]. A normal distribution prior with a mean of 1 300 ms is imposed on ATT and an automatic relevancy determination prior is used on macrovascular perfusion to remove this com-ponent from non-arterial voxels. Slice-timing correction is performed by adjusting post-labeling delays in each voxel according to its slice timing offset, and perfusion is converted from arbitrary units into ml/100g/min using the mean signal value of cerebral blood flow in the lateral ventricles from the calibration image [132]. Lastly, par-tial volume effect (PVE) is corrected using a spatial varia-tional Bayes method implemented in oxford_asl [131]; the required partial volume estimates are obtained using Toblerone operating on the FreeSurfer-derived cortical surfaces and subcortical segmentations [133, 134]. For PVE correction, a normal distribution prior with a mean of 1 300 ms for grey matter ATT and a mean of 1 600 ms 

for white matter ATT is used. Volumetric cerebral blood perfusion and ATT maps from oxford_asl are produced in both ASL-gridded T 1-weighted space and MNI 152 –2 mm template space, via the FNIRT-based registration produced by the HCP struc-tural processing pipeline. To generate output maps in greyordinates space (CIFTI format), the volumet-ric outputs of oxford_asl are projected onto the indi-vidual’s native cortical surface using the HCP ribbon-constrained method, registered with MSMAll multimodal areal-feature-based registration and resampled to a com-mon surface mesh, and finally smoothed with a 2

mm full-width half-maximum kernel using a surface-constrained method [135–138]. The surface and MNI outputs (masked to consider subcortical structures only) are combined to produce the final CIFTI greyordinates files, which serve as the input data format for subsequent analyses in this study. Participant-specific perfusion maps are originally produced as greyordinates files (including 

91 282 vertices/voxels), which we then parcellate them by averaging all greyordinates belonging to the same region of our cortical atlas. Subsequently, we z-score 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

19 the data of individual participants and then z-score each region across individuals. Based on normalised down-sampled data, we compute the regions-by-regions covari-ance matrix across participants. 

> Gene co-expression from microarray transcriptomics

Correlated gene expression represents the transcrip-tional similarity between pairs of cortical regions [24, 51]. Regional microarray expression data were ob-tained from 6 post-mortem brains (1 female, ages 24 .0–

57 .0, 42 .50 ± 13 .38 ) provided by the Allen Human Brain Atlas (AHBA, https://human.brain-map.org [52]). We followed the same preprocessing as recently described [139]. Briefly, the Allen Human Brain Atlas (AHBA) is a publicly available transcriptional atlas containing gene expression data measured with DNA microarrays and sampled from hundreds of histologically validated neuroanatomical structures across six (five male and one female) normal postmortem human brains. We ex-tracted and mapped gene expression data to the 68 cor-tical ROIs of the Desikan-Killiany atlas using the abagen 

toolbox (version 0.1.1; https://github.com/rmarkello/ abagen [140]). Data was pooled between homologous cortical regions to ensure adequate coverage of both left (data from six donors) and right hemisphere (data from two donors). Distances between samples were evaluated on the cortical surface with a 2mm distance threshold. Only probes where expression measures were above a background threshold in more than 50% of samples were selected. A representative probe for a gene was selected based on highest intensity. 15,633 genes survived these preprocessing and quality assurance steps. Finally, the region × region correlated gene expression matrix was constructed by correlating (Pearson’s r) the normalised gene expression profile at every pair of brain regions. We also replicate our main results using human gene expres-sion data from an alternative modality, RNA-seq, which was available from 2/6 AHBA donors [52]. 

> Receptor co-expression from Positron Emission Tomography

Receptor similarity indexes the degree to which the re-ceptor density profiles at two cortical regions are cor-related [24, 38]. Here we followed the same pro-cedures as in [24]. Briefly, receptor densities were estimated using PET tracer studies for a total of 18 receptors and transporters, across 9 neurotransmit-ter systems, recently made available by Hansen and colleagues at https://github.com/netneurolab/hansen_ receptors [38]. These include dopamine (D 1 [141], D 2

[142–145], DAT [146], noradrenaline (NAT [147–150], serotonin (5-HT 1A [151], 5-HT 1B [151–156], 5-HT 2A

[157], 5-HT 4 [157], 5-HT 6 [158, 159] 5-HTT [157]), acetylcholine ( α4β2 [160, 161], M 1 [162], VAChT [163, 164], glutamate (mGluR 5 [165, 166] NMDA [167, 168], GABA (GABA A [169])), histamine (H 3 [170]), cannabi-noid (CB 1 [171–174]) and opioid (MOR [175]). Vol-umetric PET images were registered to the MNI-ICBM 152 nonlinear 2009 (version c, asymmetric) template, averaged across participants within each study, then par-cellated and receptors/transporters with more than one mean image of the same tracer (5-HT 1B, D 2, VAChT) were combined using a weighted average [38]. A region-by-region receptor similarity matrix was constructed by correlating (Pearson’s r) receptor profiles at every pair of cortical regions. 

> Laminar similarity from BigBrain histology

Laminar similarity is estimated from histological data and aims to uncover how similar pairs of cortical re-gions are in terms of cellular distributions across the cortical laminae. Specifically, we use data from the Big-Brain, a high-resolution (20 μm) histological reconstruc-tion of a post-mortem brain from a 65 year old male [62, 64]. Cell-staining intensity profiles were sampled across 50 equivolumetric surfaces from the pial surface to the white matter surface to estimate laminar varia-tion in neuronal density and soma size. Intensity profiles at various cortical depths can be used to approximately identify boundaries of cortical layers that separate supra-granular (cortical layers I–III) granular (cortical layer IV), and infragranular (cortical layers V-VI) layers. The data were obtained on fsaverage surface (164k vertices) from the BigBrainWarp toolbox [176] and were parcellated into 68 cortical regions according to the Desikan-Killianty atlas [75]. The region × region lam-inar similarity matrix was calculated as the partial cor-relation (Pearson’s r) of cell intensities between pairs of cortical regions, after correcting for the mean intensity across cortical regions. Laminar similarity was first intro-duced in Paquola et al. [64] and has also been referred to as “microstructure profile covariance”. 

> Meta-analytic cognitive similarity from NeuroSynth

Continuous measures of the association between vox-els and cognitive categories were obtained from Neu-roSynth, an automated term-based meta-analytic tool that synthesizes results from more than 14 000 published fMRI studies by searching for high-frequency key words (such as “pain” and “attention” terms) that are systemat-ically mentioned in the papers alongside fMRI voxel co-ordinates (https://github.com/neurosynth/neurosynth), using the volumetric association test maps [65]. This coninuous measure of association strength is the ten-dency that a given term is reported in the functional neu-roimaging study if there is activation observed at a given voxel. Note that NeuroSynth does not distinguish be-tween areas that are activated or deactivated in relation to the term of interest, nor the degree of activation, only 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

20 that certain brain areas are frequently reported in con-junction with certain words. Although more than a thou-sand terms are catalogued in the NeuroSynth engine, we refine our analysis by focusing on cognitive function and therefore we limit the terms of interest to cognitive and behavioural terms. To avoid introducing a selection bias, we opted for selecting terms in a data-driven fashion in-stead of selecting terms manually. Therefore, terms were selected from the Cognitive Atlas, a public ontology of cognitive science [177], which includes a comprehen-sive list of neurocognitive terms. This approach totaled to t = 123 terms, ranging from umbrella terms (“at-tention”, “emotion”) to specific cognitive processes (“vi-sual attention”, “episodic memory”), behaviours (“eat-ing”, “sleep”), and emotional states (“fear”, “anxiety”) (note that the 123 term-based meta-analytic maps from NeuroSynth do not explicitly exclude patient studies). The Cognitive Atlas subdivision has previously been used in conjunction with NeuroSynth [178–180], so we opted for the same approach to make our results comparable to previous reports. The probabilistic measure reported by NeuroSynth can be interpreted as a quantitative rep-resentation of how regional fluctuations in activity are related to psychological processes. NeuroSynth maps are provided as voxelwise volumetric maps in MNI stan-dard space; as with the resting-state BOLD data, they were parcellated into 100 cortical regions according to the Schaefer atlas [95] (or 68 for the replication with Desikan-Killiany atlas), by averaging the values of all voxels belonging to the same parcel. Finally, we obtain a regions-by-regions matrix of meta-analytic similarity by correlating each pair of regions’ meta-analytic profiles, across terms. The full list of terms included in the present analysis is shown in Table 1. 

> Alternative meta-analytic similarity from BrainMap

Whereas NeuroSynth is an automated tool, Brain-Map is an expert-curated repository: it includes the brain coordinates that are significantly activated during thousands of different experiments from published neu-roimaging studies [76, 181]. As a result, NeuroSynth terms and BrainMap behavioural domains differ con-siderably. Here, we used maps in the Desikan-Killiany anatomical atlas, pertaining to 66 unique behavioural do-mains (the same as in [179]), obtained from 8, 703 ex-periments. The full list of BrainMap terms included in the present analysis is shown in Table 2. Experiments conducted on unhealthy participants were excluded, as well as experiments without a defined behavioural do-main. 

> Similarity of subjective response to intracranial electrical stimulation

We obtained a matrix of inter-regional similarity of subjective experiences elicited by direct intracranial elec-trical stimulation (iES), by analysing a previously pub-lished dataset of surgical patients ( N = 1 , 537 cortical sites in 67 participants) [73]. Briefly, participants under-going pre-surgical mapping self-reported their subjective experience upon direct electrical stimulation at different cortical locations. Integration of the first-person reports across the sample yields probabilistic maps of how direct stimulation elicits 8 broad categories of cognitive pro-cesses, including ‘emotion’, ‘language’, ‘memory’, and ‘vi-sion’. Based on the intrinsic connectivity network that it belongs to, each cortical region has a ‘fingerprint’ given by its probability of eliciting each of the 8 classes of sub-jective experiences from [73] upon electrical stimulation. Correlation of these probability fingerprints produces a matrix of similarity of subjective elicitation between each pair of cortical regions. 

> Structural connectivity

We used diffusion MRI (dMRI) data from the same 

100 unrelated participants (54 females and 46 males, mean age = 29 .1 ± 3.7 years) of the HCP 900 par-ticipants data release [182], as described above. The diffusion weighted imaging (DWI) acquisition protocol is covered in detail elsewhere [183]. The diffusion MRI scan was conducted on a Siemens 3T Skyra scan-ner using a 2D spin-echo single-shot multiband EPI se-quence with a multi-band factor of 3 and monopolar gradient pulse. The spatial resolution was 1.25 mm isotropic. TR= 5500 ms, TE= 89 .50 ms. The b-values were 1000 , 2000 , and 3000 s/mm 2. The total num-ber of diffusion sampling directions was 90 , 90 , and 

90 for each of the shells in addition to 6 b0 images. We used the version of the data made available in DSI Studio-compatible format at http://brain.labsolver.org/ diffusion-mri-templates/hcp-842-hcp-1021 [184]. We adopted previously reported procedures to recon-struct the human connectome from DWI data. The minimally-preprocessed DWI HCP data [183] were cor-rected for eddy current and susceptibility artifact. DWI data were then reconstructed using q-space diffeomor-phic reconstruction (QSDR [185]), as implemented in DSI Studio (www.dsi-studio.labsolver.org). QSDR is a model-free method that calculates the orientational dis-tribution of the density of diffusing water in a standard space, to conserve the diffusible spins and preserve the continuity of fiber geometry for fiber tracking. QSDR first reconstructs diffusion-weighted images in native space and computes the quantitative anisotropy (QA) in each voxel. These QA values are used to warp the brain to a template QA volume in Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space using a nonlinear registration algorithm im-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

21 

action adaptation addiction anticipation anxiety arousal association attention autobiographical memory balance belief categorization cognitive control communication competition concept consciousness consolidation context coordination decision decision making detection discrimination distraction eating efficiency effort emotion emotion regulation empathy encoding episodic memory expectancy expertise extinction face recognition facial expression familiarity fear fixation focus gaze goal hyperactivity imagery impulsivity induction inference inhibition insight integration intelligence intention interference judgment knowledge language language comprehension learning listening localization loss maintenance manipulation meaning memory memory retrieval mental imagery monitoring mood morphology motor control movement multisensory naming navigation object recognition pain perception planning priming psychosis reading reasoning recall recognition rehearsal reinforcement learning response inhibition response selection retention retrieval reward anticipation rhythm risk rule salience search selective attention semantic memory sentence comprehension skill sleep social cognition spatial attention speech perception speech production strategy strength stress sustained attention task difficulty thought uncertainty updating utility valence verbal fluency visual attention visual perception word recognition working memory TABLE 1. NeuroSynth terms | Terms that overlapped between the NeuroSynth database [65] and the Cognitive Atlas [177] were included in the analysis. air-hunger disgust language phonology speech (action) alcohol emotion learning preparation speech (language) amphetamines estrogen marijuana psychiatric medications SSRIs anger execution memory reasoning steroids and hormones antidepressants explicit motion rest syntax antipsychotics fear music sadness thermoregulation anxiety gustation nicotine semantics thirst attention happiness non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs sexuality time audition humour observation shape vision bladder hunger olfaction sleep working memory caffeine imagination opioids social cognition capsaicin inhibition orthography soma cognition interoception pain somesthesis colour ketamine pharmacology space TABLE 2. BrainMap terms | BrainMap terms are organized by behavioural domain. All 66 unique behavioural domains (excluding any undefined domains) used in analyses are shown here. 

plemented in the statistical parametric mapping (SPM) software. A diffusion sampling length ratio of 2.5 was used, and the output resolution was 1 mm. A modified FACT algorithm [186] was then used to perform deter-ministic fiber tracking on the reconstructed data, with the following parameters [187]: angular cutoff of 55 ◦,step size of 1.0 mm, minimum length of 10 mm, maxi-mum length of 400 mm, spin density function smoothing of 0.0, and a QA threshold determined by DWI signal in the cerebrospinal fluid. Each of the streamlines gener-ated was automatically screened for its termination loca-tion. A white matter mask was created by applying DSI Studio’s default anisotropy threshold ( 0.6 Otsu’s thresh-old) to the spin distribution function’s anisotropy values. The mask was used to eliminate streamlines with prema-ture termination in the white matter region. Determinis-tic fiber tracking was performed until 1, 000 , 000 stream-lines were reconstructed for each individual. For each individual, their structural connectome was reconstructed by drawing an edge between each pair of regions i and j from the Desikan-Killiany cortical atlas [110] if there were white matter tracts connecting the corresponding brain regions end-to-end; edge weights were quantified as the number of streamlines connect-ing each pair of regions, normalised by ROI distance and size. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 A group-consensus matrix A across participants was then obtained using the distance-dependent procedure of Betzel and colleagues, to mitigate concerns about in-consistencies in reconstruction of individual participants’ structural connectomes [188]. This approach seeks to preserve both the edge density and the prevalence and length distribution of inter- and intra-hemispheric edge length distribution of individual participants’ connec-tomes, and it is designed to produce a representative connectome [188, 189]. This procedure produces a bi-nary consensus network indicating which edges to pre-serve. The weight of each non-zero edge is then com-puted as the mean of the corresponding non-zero edges across participants. 

> F-TRACT database of cortico-cortical evoked potentials

As an alternative to diffusion tractography, which is non-invasive but also not causal, we employ a re-cently assembled database that reports the amplitude of cortico-cortical evoked potentials between pairs of cor-tical regions, from the large multicentric F-TRACT con-sortium [77, 190, 191]. Briefly, cortico-cortical evoked potentials were quantified by stereo-EEG (SEEG) As part of a presurgical evaluation of patients’ drug-resistant epilepsy. The CCEPs were recorded using local clinical practice, following 1-Hz stimulations (99.5% of CCEPs), or rarely 2 or 3 Hz (0.5% of CCEPs), between two con-tiguous contacts located either in the grey matter (61% of contacts) or white matter (39% of contacts), using ei-ther monophasic (20% of CCEPs) or biphasic (80% of CCEPs) electrical pulses. The number of pulses in a row were up to 40 and only stimulation runs with at least 3 pulses were considered. On average, the patients were implanted with 320 contacts (min: 60, max: 618) and were stimulated 58 times (min: 1, max: 257). The evoked response was considered significant if its abso-lute value reached the threshold of z = 5 during the first 200 ms post-stimulation onset. This condition indicated the presence of a functional link between the stimulation and the recording sites [77, 190, 191]. Fully processed data at the group level are available for download on the atlas page F-TRACT website (f-tract.eu/atlas). In total, the database comprises data from > 34 354 direct electri-cal stimulations in 780 patients [77]. 

> Dominance analysis

To consider all networks of inter-regional interac-tions together and evaluate their respective contribu-tions, we performed a dominance analysis with the vectorised brain networks of Euclidean distance, struc-tural connectivity, gene co-expression, receptor simi-larity, laminar similarity, electrophysiological similar-ity, metabolic similarity, and meta-analytic cognitive co-activation as predictors; and each participant’s vec-torised network of haemodynamic connectivity from fMRI as target. Dominance analysis seeks to determine the relative contribution (“dominance” of each indepen-dent variable to the overall fit (adjusted R2)) of the multiple linear regression model (https://github.com/ dominance-analysis/dominance-analysis) [69]. This is done by fitting the same regression model on every com-bination of predictors ( 2p −1 submodels for a model with 

p predictors). Total dominance is defined as the average of the relative increase in R2 when adding a single pre-dictor of interest to a submodel, across all 2p − 1 sub-models. The sum of the dominance of all input variables is equal to the total adjusted R2 of the complete model, making the percentage of relative importance an intu-itive method that partitions the total effect size across predictors. Subject-wise relative-importance values for each pre-dictor were then entered into a linear mixed-effects mod-elling framework to test whether the contribution of each multimodal network to haemodynamic functional con-nectivity changed across consciousness states. For each predictor network, the dependent variable was the rela-tive importance obtained from dominance analysis. We modelled these values as a function of experimental con-dition while controlling for head motion (mean frame-wise displacement) as a covariate of no interest. 

> Supportvector machine

To assess whether subject-wise patterns of multi-modal network contributions could distinguish normal from perturbed consciousness, we trained a linear sup-port vector machine (SVM) implemented as MATLAB’s 

fitcsvm function with linear kernel, using each partic-ipant’s dominance-analysis profile as the feature vector. Each feature corresponded to the relative importance of one structural or functional predictor network for ex-plaining that participant’s haemodynamic FC. Training data included healthy controls and DOC patients, as well as pre-anaesthetic baseline and anaesthesia scans from the pharmacological datasets; post-anaesthetic re-covery scans were excluded from training and reserved for out-of-sample evaluation. Observations were labelled as baseline or perturbed consciousness, and classification performance was estimated using leave-one-subject-out cross-validation. Statistical significance was assessed by repeating the same cross-validation procedure after ran-domly permuting class labels (5,000 permutations). Fi-nally, the classifier trained on all training data was ap-plied to unseen recovery scans and independent DOC subgroups to evaluate model generalisation. McNemar’s test was used to compare the classification accuracies ob-tained from the SVM trained with dominance profiles as features, and the SVM trained with univariate correla-tions as features. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

23 

Data and code availability 

The original pharmacological and DOC fMRI data are available from the corresponding authors of the original publications referenced herein. Hu-man networks of metabolic connectivity, electro-physiological connectivity, and laminar similarity are available on GitHub at https://github.com/ netneurolab/hansen_many_networks/tree/v1.0.0. Diffusion MRI data for the Human Connectome Project in DSI Studio-compatible format are available at http://brain.labsolver.org/diffusion-mri-templates/ hcp-842-hcp-1021. NeuroSynth meta-analytic maps are available at https://neurosynth.org/. Maps of subjective experience probabilities elicited by intracranial electrical stimulation are available from the supplementary mate-rials of [73]. The F-TRACT database of cortico-cortical evoked potentials is available at f-tract.eu/atlas. The Hu-man PET receptor and transporter maps are available at https://github.com/netneurolab/hansen_receptors. Hu-man gene expression data from the Allen Human Brain Atlas are available at https://human.brain-map.org/. The abagen toolbox for processing of the AHBA human transcriptomic dataset is available at https://abagen. readthedocs.io/. Third-party Python software (version 3.8) for dominance analysis is freely available at https: //github.com/dominance-analysis/dominance-analysis. 

Acknowledgments 

A.I.L. acknowledges the support of the Natural Sci-ences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), [funding reference number 202209BPF-489453-401636, Banting Postdoctoral Fellowship] and FRQNT Strategic Clusters Program (2020-RS4-265502 - Centre UNIQUE - Union Neuroscience & Artificial In-telligence - Quebec) via the UNIQUE Neuro-AI Excel-lence Award; CIHR (Funding reference ICT-201439); St John’s College, Cambridge; and a Wellcome Early Ca-reer Award (grant number 226924/Z/23/Z). B.M. ac-knowledges support from the Natural Sciences and En-gineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Cana-dian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Brain Canada Foundation Future Leaders Fund, the Canada Research Chairs Program, the Michael J. Fox Foundation, and the Healthy Brains for Healthy Lives initiative. D.M. is sup-ported by the MIT-Novo Nordisk Artificial Intelligence Postdoctoral Fellows Program. N.L.N.A. acknowledges support of the Belgian National Funds for Scientific Re-search (FRS-FNRS). A.M.O. acknowledges support from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and is a Fellow of CIFAR Mind Brain and Consciousness pro-gram. This study was also supported by the University of Liège, the University Hospital of Liège and its Algology Interdisciplinary Center. For the purpose of open access, the authors have applied a Creative Commons Attribu-tion (CC BY) licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising from this submission. 

Conflicts of interest 

None. 

References 

[1] Bharat B Biswal, Maarten Mennes, Xi-Nian Zuo, Suril Gohel, Clare Kelly, Steve M Smith, Christian F Beck-mann, Jonathan S Adelstein, Randy L Buckner, Stan Col-combe, et al. Toward discovery science of human brain function. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences ,107(10):4734–4739, 2010. [2] Bharat B Biswal and Lucina Q Uddin. The history and future of resting-state functional magnetic resonance imaging. Nature , 641(8065):1121–1131, 2025. [3] Michael D Fox and Marcus E Raichle. Spontaneous fluc-tuations in brain activity observed with functional mag-netic resonance imaging. Nature reviews neuroscience , 8 (9):700–711, 2007. [4] Stephen M Smith, Thomas E Nichols, Diego Vidaurre, Anderson M Winkler, Timothy EJ Behrens, Matthew F Glasser, Kamil Ugurbil, Deanna M Barch, David CVan Essen, and Karla L Miller. A positive-negative mode of population covariation links brain connectivity, de-mographics and behavior. Nature neuroscience , 18(11): 1565–1567, 2015. [5] Karla L Miller, Fidel Alfaro-Almagro, Neal K Bangerter, David L Thomas, Essa Yacoub, Junqian Xu, Andreas J Bartsch, Saad Jbabdi, Stamatios N Sotiropoulos, Jes-per LR Andersson, et al. Multimodal population brain imaging in the uk biobank prospective epidemiological study. Nature neuroscience , 19(11):1523–1536, 2016. [6] Monica D Rosenberg, Emily S Finn, Dustin Scheinost, Xenophon Papademetris, Xilin Shen, R Todd Constable, and Marvin M Chun. A neuromarker of sustained atten-tion from whole-brain functional connectivity. Nature neuroscience , 19(1):165–171, 2016. [7] Xilin Shen, Emily S Finn, Dustin Scheinost, Monica D Rosenberg, Marvin M Chun, Xenophon Papademetris, and R Todd Constable. Using connectome-based predic-tive modeling to predict individual behavior from brain connectivity. nature protocols , 12(3):506–518, 2017. [8] Emily S Finn, Xilin Shen, Dustin Scheinost, Monica D Rosenberg, Jessica Huang, Marvin M Chun, Xenophon Papademetris, and R Todd Constable. Functional con-nectome fingerprinting: identifying individuals using 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

24 

patterns of brain connectivity. Nature neuroscience , 18 (11):1664–1671, 2015. [9] Michael D Fox. Mapping symptoms to brain networks with the human connectome. New England Journal of Medicine , 379(23):2237–2245, 2018. [10] Zhen-Qi Liu, Andrea I Luppi, Justine Y Hansen, Ye Ella Tian, Andrew Zalesky, BT Thomas Yeo, Ben D Fulcher, and Bratislav Misic. Benchmarking methods for map-ping functional connectivity in the brain. Nature Meth-ods , 2025. [11] Michael W Cole, Danielle S Bassett, Jonathan D Power, Todd S Braver, and Steven E Petersen. Intrinsic and task-evoked network architectures of the human brain. 

Neuron , 83(1):238–251, 2014. ISSN 10974199. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2014.05.014. PMID: 24991964 arXiv: NIHMS150003 Citation Key: Cole2014 ISBN: 1097-4199 (Electronic)\r0896-6273 (Linking). [12] Angela R Laird, Simon B Eickhoff, Claudia Rottschy, Danilo Bzdok, Kimberly L Ray, and Peter T Fox. Net-works of task co-activations. Neuroimage , 80:505–514, 2013. [13] Stephen M Smith, Peter T Fox, Karla L Miller, David C Glahn, Peter Mickle Fox, Clare E Mackay, Nicola Fil-ippini, Kate E Watkins, Roberto Toro, Angela R Laird, and Christian F Beckmann. Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation and rest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,106(31):13040–13045, 2009. ISSN 0027-8424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0905267106. PMID: 19620724 arXiv: 0905267106 Citation Key: Smith2009b ISBN: 1091-6490 (Electronic)\r1091-6490 (Linking). [14] Nicolas A. Crossley, Andrea Mechelli, Petra E. Vértes, Toby T. Winton-Brown, Ameera X. Patel, Cedric E. Ginestet, Philip McGuire, and Edward T. Bullmore. Cog-nitive relevance of the community structure of the hu-man brain functional coactivation network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 110(28):11583– 11588, 2013. doi:10.1073/pnas.1220826110. [15] Roberto Toro, Peter T Fox, and Tomáš Paus. Functional coactivation map of the human brain. Cerebral cortex ,18(11):2553–2559, 2008. [16] Evan Collins, Omar Chishti, Sami Obaid, Hari Mc-Grath, Alex King, Xilin Shen, Jagriti Arora, Xenophon Papademetris, R Todd Constable, Dennis D Spencer, et al. Mapping the structure-function relationship along macroscale gradients in the human brain. Nature Com-munications , 15(1):7063, 2024. [17] Pablo Barttfeld, Lynn Uhrig, Jacobo D Sitt, Mariano Sig-man, Béchir Jarraya, and Stanislas Dehaene. Signature of consciousness in the dynamics of resting-state brain activity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,112(3):887–892, 2015. [18] Athena Demertzi, Enzo Tagliazucchi, Stanislas Dehaene, Gustavo Deco, Pablo Barttfeld, Federico Raimondo, Charlotte Martial, Davinia Fernández-Espejo, Benjamin Rohaut, HU Voss, et al. Human consciousness is sup-ported by dynamic complex patterns of brain signal co-ordination. Science advances , 5(2):eaat7603, 2019. [19] Andrea I. Luppi, Lynn Uhrig, Jordy Tasserie, Camilo M. Signorelli, Emmanuel A. Stamatakis, Alain Destexhe, Bechir Jarraya, and Rodrigo Cofre. Local orchestration of distributed functional patterns supporting loss and restoration of consciousness in the primate brain. Nature Communications , 15(1):2171, mar 11 2024. ISSN 2041-1723. doi:10.1038/s41467-024-46382-w. URL https:// www.nature.com/articles/s41467-024-46382-w. pub-lisher: Nature Publishing Group. [20] Jordy Tasserie, Lynn Uhrig, Jacobo D Sitt, Dragana Manasova, Morgan Dupont, Stanislas Dehaene, and Béchir Jarraya. Deep brain stimulation of the thala-mus restores signatures of consciousness in a nonhu-man primate model. Sci. Adv , 8:5547, 2022. doi: 10.1126/SCIADV.ABL5547. URL https://www.science. org. [Online; accessed 2022-03-20]. [21] Daniel Gutierrez-Barragan, Neha Atulkumar Singh, Filomena Grazia Alvino, Ludovico Coletta, Federico Roc-chi, Elizabeth De Guzman, Alberto Galbusera, Mauro Uboldi, Stefano Panzeri, and Alessandro Gozzi. Unique spatiotemporal fmri dynamics in the awake mouse brain. Current biology , 32(2):1–14, 1 2021. ISSN 1879-0445. doi:10.1016/J.CUB.2021.12.015. PMID: 34998465 publisher: Curr Biol. [22] Andrea I Luppi, Fernando E Rosas, Pedro AM Mediano, Athena Demertzi, David K Menon, and Emmanuel A Sta-matakis. Unravelling consciousness and brain function through the lens of time, space, and information. Trends in Neurosciences , 2024. [23] Andrea I Luppi, Daniel Golkowski, Andreas Ranft, Rudi-ger Ilg, Denis Jordan, Danilo Bzdok, Adrian M Owen, Lo-rina Naci, Emmanuel A Stamatakis, Enrico Amico, et al. General anaesthesia decreases the uniqueness of brain functional connectivity across individuals and species. 

Nature Human Behaviour , pages 1–18, 2025. [24] Justine Y Hansen, Golia Shafiei, Katharina Voigt, Emma X Liang, Sylvia ML Cox, Marco Leyton, Sharna D Jamadar, and Bratislav Misic. Integrating multimodal and multiscale connectivity blueprints of the human cerebral cortex in health and disease. PLoS biology , 21 (9):e3002314, 2023. [25] Vincent Bazinet, Justine Y Hansen, and Bratislav Misic. Towards a biologically annotated brain connectome. Na-ture reviews neuroscience , 24(12):747–760, 2023. [26] Laura E. Suárez, Ross D. Markello, Richard F. Bet-zel, and Bratislav Misic. Linking structure and func-tion in macroscale brain networks. Trends in Cogni-tive Sciences , 24(4):302–315, 4 2020. ISSN 1879307X. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2020.01.008. PMID: 32160567 pub-lisher: Elsevier Ltd. [27] Panagiotis Fotiadis, Linden Parkes, Kathryn A Davis, Theodore D Satterthwaite, Russell T Shinohara, and Dani S Bassett. Structure–function coupling in macroscale human brain networks. Nature Reviews Neu-roscience , 25(10):688–704, 2024. [28] Andrea Avena-Koenigsberger, Bratislav Misic, and Olaf Sporns. Communication dynamics in complex brain net-works. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 19(1):17–33, 2018. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

25 

[29] Caio Seguin, Olaf Sporns, and Andrew Zalesky. Brain network communication: concepts, models and ap-plications. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , pages 1–18, jul 12 2023. ISSN 1471-0048. doi:10.1038/s41583-023-00718-5. URL https://www.nature.com/articles/ s41583-023-00718-5. publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [30] Bertha Vázquez-Rodríguez, Laura E Suárez, Ross DMarkello, Golia Shafiei, Casey Paquola, Patric Hagmann, Martijn P Van Den Heuvel, Boris C Bernhardt, R Nathan Spreng, and Bratislav Misic. Gradients of structure– function tethering across neocortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 116(42):21219–21227, 2019. [31] Graham L Baum, Zaixu Cui, David R Roalf, Rastko Ciric, Richard F Betzel, Bart Larsen, Matthew Cieslak, Philip A Cook, Cedric H Xia, Tyler M Moore, et al. Development of structure–function coupling in human brain networks during youth. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(1):771–778, 2020. [32] Maria Giulia Preti and Dimitri Van De Ville. De-coupling of brain function from structure reveals re-gional behavioral specialization in humans. Nature Communications , 10(1), 2019. ISSN 20411723. doi: 10.1038/s41467-019-12765-7. URL https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41467-019-12765-7. arXiv: 1905.07813. [33] Selen Atasoy, Isaac Donnelly, and Joel Pearson. Hu-man brain networks function in connectome-specific harmonic waves. Nature communications , 7(1):10340, 2016. [34] Gustavo Deco, Adrián Ponce-Alvarez, Dante Mantini, Gian Luca Romani, Patric Hagmann, and Maurizio Cor-betta. Resting-state functional connectivity emerges from structurally and dynamically shaped slow linear fluctuations. Journal of Neuroscience , 33(27):11239– 11252, 2013. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1091-13.2013. [35] Christopher J. Honey, Rolf Kötter, Michael Breakspear, and Olaf Sporns. Network structure of cerebral cor-tex shapes functional connectivity on multiple time scales. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 104(24):10240–10245, 6 2007. ISSN 00278424. doi:10.1073/pnas.0701519104. PMID: 17548818 publisher: National Academy of Sci-ences. [36] C. J. Honey, O. Sporns, L. Cammoun, X. Gigandet, J. P. Thiran, R. Meuli, and P. Hagmann. Predict-ing human resting-state functional connectivity from structural connectivity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106(6):2035–2040, 2 2009. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0811168106. publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. [37] Alexandros Goulas, Jean-Pierre Changeux, Konrad Wagstyl, Katrin Amunts, Nicola Palomero-Gallagher, and Claus C Hilgetag. The natural axis of transmitter re-ceptor distribution in the human cerebral cortex. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118(3): e2020574118, 2021. [38] Justine Y Hansen, Golia Shafiei, Ross D Markello, Sylvia Cox, Kelly Smart, Etienne Aumont, Stijn Ser-vaes, Stephanie Scala, Gabriel Wainstein, Gleb Bez-gin, Thomas Funck, W Schmitz, Marc-andre Bedard, R Nathan Spreng, Jean-paul Soucy, and Synthia Gui-mond. Mapping neurotransmitter systems to the struc-tural and functional organization of the human neocor-tex. Nature Neuroscience , (accepted):1–26, 2022. [39] Karl Zilles and Nicola Palomero-Gallagher. Multiple transmitter receptors in regions and layers of the human cerebral cortex. Frontiers in neuroanatomy , 11:78, 2017. [40] Sean Froudist-Walsh, Ting Xu, Meiqi Niu, Lucija Rapan, Ling Zhao, Daniel S Margulies, Karl Zilles, Xiao-Jing Wang, and Nicola Palomero-Gallagher. Gradients of neu-rotransmitter receptor expression in the macaque cortex. 

Nature neuroscience , 26(7):1281–1294, 2023. [41] Sharna D Jamadar, Phillip GD Ward, Emma X Liang, Edwina R Orchard, Zhaolin Chen, and Gary F Egan. Metabolic and hemodynamic resting-state connectivity of the human brain: a high-temporal resolution simulta-neous bold-fmri and fdg-fpet multimodality study. Cere-bral Cortex , 31(6):2855–2867, 2021. [42] Katharina Voigt, Emma X Liang, Bratislav Misic, Phillip GD Ward, Gary F Egan, and Sharna D Jamadar. Metabolic and functional connectivity provide unique and complementary insights into cognition-connectome relationships. Cerebral Cortex , 33(4):1476–1488, 2023. [43] Tommaso Volpi, Erica Silvestri, Marco Aiello, John J Lee, Andrei G Vlassenko, Manu S Goyal, Maurizio Cor-betta, and Alessandra Bertoldo. The brain’s “dark en-ergy” puzzle: How strongly is glucose metabolism linked to resting-state brain activity? Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow & Metabolism , 44(8):1433–1449, 2024. [44] Golia Shafiei, Ben D Fulcher, Bradley Voytek, Theodore D Satterthwaite, Sylvain Baillet, and Bratislav Misic. Neurophysiological signatures of cortical micro-architecture. Nature communications , 14(1):6000, 2023. [45] Golia Shafiei, Sylvain Baillet, and Bratislav Misic. Hu-man electromagnetic and haemodynamic networks sys-tematically converge in unimodal cortex and diverge in transmodal cortex. PLoS biology , 20(8):e3001735, 2022. [46] Catherine Jean Chu, Naoaki Tanaka, J Diaz, Brian L Ed-low, Ona Wu, M Hämäläinen, S Stufflebeam, Sydney S Cash, and Mark A Kramer. Eeg functional connectivity is partially predicted by underlying white matter connec-tivity. Neuroimage , 108:23–33, 2015. [47] Matthew J Brookes, Joanne R Hale, Johanna M Zumer, Claire M Stevenson, Susan T Francis, Gareth R Barnes, Julia P Owen, Peter G Morris, and Srikantan S Na-garajan. Measuring functional connectivity using meg: methodology and comparison with fcmri. Neuroimage ,56(3):1082–1104, 2011. [48] Biyu J He, Abraham Z Snyder, John M Zempel, Matthew D Smyth, and Marcus E Raichle. Electrophysio-logical correlates of the brain’s intrinsic large-scale func-tional architecture. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 105(41):16039–16044, 2008. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

26 

[49] Matthew J Brookes, Mark Woolrich, Henry Luckhoo, Darren Price, Joanne R Hale, Mary C Stephenson, Gareth R Barnes, Stephen M Smith, and Peter G Mor-ris. Investigating the electrophysiological basis of rest-ing state networks using magnetoencephalography. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108(40): 16783–16788, 2011. [50] James C Pang, Kevin M Aquino, Marianne Oldehinkel, Peter A Robinson, Ben D Fulcher, Michael Breakspear, and Alex Fornito. Geometric constraints on human brain function. Nature , 618(7965):566–574, 2023. [51] Jonas Richiardi, Andre Altmann, Anna-Clare Mi-lazzo, Catie Chang, M Mallar Chakravarty, Tobias Ba-naschewski, Gareth J Barker, Arun LW Bokde, Uli Bromberg, Christian Büchel, et al. Correlated gene expression supports synchronous activity in brain net-works. Science , 348(6240):1241–1244, 2015. [52] Michael J Hawrylycz, Ed S Lein, Angela L Guillozet-Bongaarts, Elaine H Shen, Lydia Ng, Jeremy A Miller, Louie N Van De Lagemaat, Kimberly A Smith, Amanda Ebbert, Zackery L Riley, et al. An anatomically compre-hensive atlas of the adult human brain transcriptome. 

Nature , 489(7416):391, 2012. [53] Ed S Lein, Michael J Hawrylycz, Nancy Ao, Mikael Ayres, Amy Bensinger, Amy Bernard, Andrew F Boe, Mark S Boguski, Kevin S Brockway, Emi J Byrnes, et al. Genome-wide atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain. 

Nature , 445(7124):168–176, 2007. [54] Tingting Bo, Jie Li, Ganlu Hu, Ge Zhang, Wei Wang, Qian Lv, Shaoling Zhao, Junjie Ma, Meng Qin, Xiaohui Yao, et al. Brain-wide and cell-specific transcriptomic in-sights into mri-derived cortical morphology in macaque monkeys. Nature Communications , 14(1):1499, 2023. [55] Ao Chen, Yidi Sun, Ying Lei, Chao Li, Sha Liao, Juan Meng, Yiqin Bai, Zhen Liu, Zhifeng Liang, Zhiyong Zhu, et al. Single-cell spatial transcriptome reveals cell-type organization in the macaque cortex. Cell , 186(17): 3726–3743, 2023. [56] Casey Paquola, Jakob Seidlitz, Oualid Benkarim, Jessica Royer, Petr Klimes, Richard AI Bethlehem, Sara Lariv-ière, Reinder Vos de Wael, Raul Rodríguez-Cruces, Jef-fery A Hall, et al. A multi-scale cortical wiring space links cellular architecture and functional dynamics in the hu-man brain. PLoS biology , 18(11):e3000979, 2020. [57] Matthew F Glasser and David C Van Essen. Mapping hu-man cortical areas in vivo based on myelin content as revealed by t1-and t2-weighted mri. Journal of neuro-science , 31(32):11597–11616, 2011. [58] Joshua B. Burt, Murat Demirta¸ s, William J. Eckner, Natasha M. Navejar, Jie Lisa Ji, William J. Martin, Al-berto Bernacchia, Alan Anticevic, and John D. Murray. Hierarchy of transcriptomic specialization across human cortex captured by structural neuroimaging topography. 

Nature Neuroscience , 21(9):1251–1259, 9 2018. ISSN 15461726. doi:10.1038/s41593-018-0195-0. PMID: 30082915 publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [59] Julia M Huntenburg, Pierre-Louis Bazin, Alexandros Goulas, Christine L Tardif, Arno Villringer, and Daniel S Margulies. A systematic relationship between functional connectivity and intracortical myelin in the human cere-bral cortex. Cerebral Cortex , 27(2):981–997, 2017. [60] Ben D Fulcher, John D Murray, Valerio Zerbi, and Xiao-Jing Wang. Multimodal gradients across mouse cortex. 

Proc Natl Acad Sci USA , 116(10):4689–4695, 2019. [61] Isaac Sebenius, Jakob Seidlitz, Varun Warrier, Richard AI Bethlehem, Aaron Alexander-Bloch, Travis T Mallard, Rafael Romero Garcia, Edward T Bullmore, and Sarah E Morgan. Robust estimation of cortical similarity net-works from brain mri. Nature neuroscience , 26(8):1461– 1471, 2023. [62] Katrin Amunts, Claude Lepage, Louis Borgeat, Hartmut Mohlberg, Timo Dickscheid, Marc-Étienne Rousseau, Se-bastian Bludau, Pierre-Louis Bazin, Lindsay B Lewis, Ana-Maria Oros-Peusquens, et al. Bigbrain: an ultrahigh-resolution 3d human brain model. science , 340 (6139):1472–1475, 2013. [63] Dragana Manasova, Laouen Mayal Louan Bel-loli, Martin Justinus Rosenfelder, Lina Willacker, Emilia Fló Rama, Chiara Valota, Bertrand Her-mann, Brigitte Charlotte Kaufmann, Alice Pirastru, Chiara Camilla Derchi, et al. Multimodal multicentre investigation of diagnostic and prognostic markers in disorders of consciousness. Brain , page awaf412, 2026. [64] Casey Paquola, Reinder Vos De Wael, Konrad Wagstyl, Richard AI Bethlehem, Seok-Jun Hong, Jakob Seidlitz, Edward T Bullmore, Alan C Evans, Bratislav Misic, Daniel S Margulies, et al. Microstructural and functional gradients are increasingly dissociated in transmodal cor-tices. PLoS biology , 17(5):e3000284, 2019. [65] Tal Yarkoni, Russell A Poldrack, Thomas E Nichols, David C Van Essen, and Tor D Wager. Large-scale au-tomated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging data. Nature methods , 8(8):665–670, 2011. [66] Andrea I Luppi, Michael M Craig, Ioannis Pappas, Paola Finoia, Guy B Williams, Judith Allanson, John D. Pickard, Adrian M. Owen, Lorina Naci, David K Menon, and Emmanuel A. Stamatakis. Consciousness-specific dynamic interactions of brain integration and functional diversity. Nature Communications , 10(1), 2019. ISSN 20411723. doi:10.1038/s41467-019-12658-9. PMID: 31601811. [67] Andreas Ranft, Daniel Golkowski, Tobias Kiel, Valentin Riedl, Philipp Kohl, Guido Rohrer, Joachim Pientka, Sebastian Berger, Alexander Thul, Max Maurer, Chris-tine Preibisch, Claus Zimmer, George A Mashour, Eber-hard F Kochs, Denis Jordan, and Rüdiger Ilg. Neu-ral correlates of sevoflurane-induced unconsciousness identified by simultaneous functional magnetic reso-nance imaging and electroencephalography. Anesthesi-ology , 125(5):861–872, 2016. ISSN 1528-1175. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000001322. PMID: 27617689 Citation Key: Ranft2016 ISBN: 0000000000. [68] Vincent Bonhomme, Audrey Vanhaudenhuyse, Athena Demertzi, Marie-Aurélie Bruno, Oceane Jaquet, Mo-hamed Ali Bahri, Alain Plenevaux, Melanie Boly, Pierre Boveroux, Andrea Soddu, Jean François Brichant, Pierre 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

Maquet, and Steven Laureys. Resting-state network-specific breakdown of functional connectivity during ke-tamine alteration of consciousness in volunteers. Anes-thesiology , 125(5):873–888, 11 2016. ISSN 0003-3022. doi:10.1097/ALN.0000000000001275. pub-lisher: The American Society of Anesthesiologists Cita-tion Key: Bonhomme2016. [69] Razia Azen and David V Budescu. The dominance anal-ysis approach for comparing predictors in multiple re-gression. Psychological methods , 8(2):129, 2003. [70] Justine Y Hansen, Golia Shafiei, Jacob W Vogel, Kelly Smart, Carrie E Bearden, Martine Hoogman, Barbara Franke, Daan Van Rooij, Jan Buitelaar, Carrie R McDon-ald, et al. Local molecular and global connectomic con-tributions to cross-disorder cortical abnormalities. Na-ture communications , 13(1):4682, 2022. [71] Milan Van Maldegem, Jakub Vohryzek, Selen Atasoy, Naji Alnagger, Paolo Cardone, Vincent Bonhomme, Au-drey Vanhaudenhuyse, Athena Demertzi, Oceane Ja-quet, Mohamed Ali Bahri, et al. Connectome harmonic decomposition tracks the presence of disconnected con-sciousness during ketamine-induced unresponsiveness. 

British Journal of Anaesthesia , 2025. [72] Valerie J Sydnor, Bart Larsen, Danielle S Bassett, Aaron Alexander-Bloch, Damien A Fair, Conor Liston, Allyson P Mackey, Michael P Milham, Adam Pines, David RRoalf, Jakob Seidlitz, Ting Xu, Armin Raznahan, and Theodore D Satterthwaite. Neurodevelopment of the association cortices: Patterns, mechanisms, and im-plications for psychopathology. Neuron , 2021. ISSN 08966273. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2021.06.016. URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.06.016. [On-line; accessed 2021-07-26]. [73] Kieran CR Fox, Lin Shi, Sori Baek, Omri Raccah, Brett L Foster, Srijani Saha, Daniel S Margulies, Aaron Kucyi, and Josef Parvizi. Intrinsic network architecture predicts the effects elicited by intracranial electrical stimulation of the human brain. Nature human behaviour , 4(10): 1039–1052, 2020. [74] Shan H. Siddiqi, Konrad P. Kording, Josef Parvizi, and Michael D. Fox. Causal mapping of human brain function. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 23(6):361–375, 2022. doi:10.1038/s41583-022-00583-8. [75] Rahul S Desikan, Florent Ségonne, Bruce Fischl, Brian T Quinn, Bradford C Dickerson, Deborah Blacker, Randy L Buckner, Anders M Dale, R Paul Maguire, Bradley T Hy-man, et al. An automated labeling system for subdivid-ing the human cerebral cortex on mri scans into gyral based regions of interest. NeuroImage , 31(3):968–980, 2006. [76] Angela R Laird, Jack J Lancaster, and Peter T Fox. Brain-map: the social evolution of a human brain mapping database. Neuroinformatics , 3:65–77, 2005. [77] Jean-Didier Lemaréchal, Maciej Jedynak, Lena Trebaul, Anthony Boyer, François Tadel, Manik Bhattacharjee, Pierre Deman, Viateur Tuyisenge, Leila Ayoubian, Eti-enne Hugues, et al. A brain atlas of axonal and synaptic delays based on modelling of cortico-cortical evoked po-tentials. Brain , 145(5):1653–1667, 2022. [78] Karl J Friston. Functional and effective connectivity: a review. Brain connectivity , 1(1):13–36, 2011. [79] Enrique CA Hansen, Demian Battaglia, Andreas Spiegler, Gustavo Deco, and Viktor K Jirsa. Functional connectiv-ity dynamics: Modeling the switching behavior of the resting state. NeuroImage , 105:525–535, 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.11.001. [80] Sylvain Baillet. Magnetoencephalography for brain elec-trophysiology and imaging. Nature neuroscience , 20(3): 327–339, 2017. [81] Jordy Tasserie, Lynn Uhrig, Jacobo D Sitt, Dragana Manasova, Morgan Dupont, Stanislas Dehaene, and Béchir Jarraya. Deep brain stimulation of the thala-mus restores signatures of consciousness in a nonhu-man primate model. Sci. Adv , 8:5547, 2022. doi: 10.1126/SCIADV.ABL5547. [82] Lennart RB Spindler, Andrea I Luppi, Ram M Adapa, Michael M Craig, Peter Coppola, Alexander RD Peattie, Anne E Manktelow, Paola Finoia, Barbara J Sahakian, Guy B Williams, et al. Dopaminergic brainstem discon-nection is common to pharmacological and pathological consciousness perturbation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 118(30):e2026289118, 2021. [83] James M. Shine, Laura D. Lewis, Douglas D. Garrett, and Kai Hwang. The impact of the human thalamus on brain-wide information processing. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience , 24(7):416–430, 7 2023. ISSN 1471-0048. doi:10.1038/s41583-023-00701-0. PMID: 37237103. [84] Andrea I. Luppi, Lynn Uhrig, Jordy Tasserie, Camilo M. Signorelli, Emmanuel A. Stamatakis, Alain Destexhe, Bechir Jarraya, and Rodrigo Cofre. Local orchestration of distributed functional patterns supporting loss and restoration of consciousness in the primate brain. Na-ture Communications , 15(1):2171, mar 11 2024. ISSN 2041-1723. doi:10.1038/s41467-024-46382-w. pub-lisher: Nature Publishing Group. [85] Brian L Edlow, Mark Olchanyi, Holly J Freeman, Jian Li, Chiara Maffei, Samuel B Snider, Lilla Zöllei, J Eugenio Iglesias, Jean Augustinack, Yelena G Bodien, et al. Mul-timodal mri reveals brainstem connections that sustain wakefulness in human consciousness. Science Transla-tional Medicine , 16(745):eadj4303, 2024. [86] Eli J Müller, Brandon R Munn, Michelle J Redinbaugh, Joseph Lizier, Michael Breakspear, Yuri B Saalmann, and James M Shine. The non-specific matrix thalamus facili-tates the cortical information processing modes relevant for conscious awareness. Cell reports , 42(8), 2023. [87] Brandon R. Munn, Eli J. Müller, Jaan Aru, Christo-pher J. Whyte, Albert Gidon, Matthew E. Larkum, and James M. Shine. A thalamocortical substrate for integrated information via critical synchronous burst-ing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-ences , 120(46):e2308670120, nov 14 2023. doi: 10.1073/pnas.2308670120. publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

28 

[88] Michelle J. Redinbaugh, J.M. Phillips, N.A. Kambi, S. Mohanta, S. Andryk, G.L. Dooley, Mohsen Afrasiabi, Aeyal Raz, and Yuri B. Saalmann. Thalamus modulates consciousness via layer-specific control of cortex. Neu-ron , 106:66–75.e12, 2020. [89] André M. Bastos, Jacob A. Donoghue, Scott L. Brincat, Meredith Mahnke, Jorge Yanar, Josefina Correa, Ayan S. Waite, Mikael Lundqvist, Jefferson Roy, Emery N. Brown, and Earl K. Miller. Neural effects of propofol-induced unconsciousness and its reversal using thala-mic stimulation. eLife , 10, 2021. ISSN 2050084X. doi:10.7554/ELIFE.60824. PMID: 33904411 publisher: eLife Sciences Publications Ltd. [90] Mohsen Afrasiabi, Michelle J. Redinbaugh, Jessica M. Phillips, Niranjan A. Kambi, Sounak Mohanta, Aeyal Raz, Andrew M. Haun, and Yuri B. Saalmann. Con-sciousness depends on integration between parietal cor-tex, striatum, and thalamus. Cell Systems , 12(4): 363–373.e11, apr 21 2021. ISSN 2405-4720. doi: 10.1016/j.cels.2021.02.003. PMID: 33730543 PMCID: PMC8084606. [91] George A. Mashour. Anesthesia and the neurobiology of consciousness. Neuron , 0(0), apr 4 2024. ISSN 0896-6273. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2024.03.002. URL https://www.cell.com/neuron/abstract/ S0896-6273(24)00156-9. publisher: Elsevier PMID: 38579714. [92] [93] Klaus H Maier-Hein, Peter F Neher, Jean-Christophe Houde, Marc-Alexandre Côté, Eleftherios Garyfallidis, Jidan Zhong, Maxime Chamberland, Fang-Cheng Yeh, Ying-Chia Lin, Qing Ji, et al. The challenge of mapping the human connectome based on diffusion tractography. 

Nature communications , 8(1):1349, 2017. [94] Jesper Ekelund, Mark Slifstein, Raj Narendran, Olivier Guillin, Hemant Belani, Ning-Ning Guo, Yuying Hwang, Dah-Ren Hwang, Anissa Abi-Dargham, and Marc Laru-elle. In vivo da d 1 receptor selectivity of nnc 112 and sch 23390. Molecular imaging and biology , 9(3):117– 125, 2007. [95] Alexander Schaefer, Ru Kong, Evan M Gordon, Timo-thy O Laumann, Xi-Nian Zuo, Avram J Holmes, Simon B Eickhoff, and BT Thomas Yeo. Local-global parcella-tion of the human cerebral cortex from intrinsic func-tional connectivity mri. Cerebral cortex , 28(9):3095– 3114, 2018. [96] Peter T. Fox and Jack L. Lancaster. Opinion: Mapping context and content: the BrainMap model. Nature Re-views. Neuroscience , 3(4):319–321, April 2002. ISSN 1471-003X. doi:10.1038/nrn789. [97] Lorina Naci, Leah Sinai, and Adrian M Owen. De-tecting and interpreting conscious experiences in behaviorally non-responsive patients. NeuroImage ,145:304–313, 2017. ISSN 10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.059. PMID: 26679327 Citation Key: Naci2015. [98] Lorina Naci, Amelie Haugg, Alex MacDonald, Mimma Anello, Evan Houldin, Shakib Naqshbandi, Laura EGonzalez-Lara, Miguel Arango, Christopher Harle, Rho-dri Cusack, and Adrian M Owen. Functional diversity of brain networks supports consciousness and verbal in-telligence. Scientific Reports , 8(1):1–15, 2018. ISSN 20452322. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-31525-z. PMID: 30185912. [99] Andrea I. Luppi, Jakub Vohryzek, Morten L. Kringelbach, Pedro A. M. Mediano, Michael M. Craig, Ram Adapa, Robin L. Carhart-Harris, Leor Roseman, Ioannis Pappas, Alexander R. D. Peattie, Anne E. Manktelow, Barbara J. Sahakian, Paola Finoia, Guy B. Williams, Judith Allan-son, John D. Pickard, David K. Menon, Selen Atasoy, and Emmanuel A. Stamatakis. Distributed harmonic pat-terns of structure-function dependence orchestrate hu-man consciousness. Communications Biology , 6(1):1– 19, 1 2023. ISSN 2399-3642. doi:10.1038/s42003-023-04474-1. number: 1 publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [100] Marie-Aurélie Bruno, Audrey Vanhaudenhuyse, Aurore Thibaut, Gustave Moonen, and Steven Laureys. From unresponsive wakefulness to minimally conscious plus and functional locked-in syndromes: Recent advances in our understanding of disorders of consciousness. Jour-nal of Neurology , 258:1373–1384, a2011. [101] Sophie Wannez et al. Prevalence of coma-recovery scale-revised signs of consciousness in patients in minimally conscious state. Neuropsychological Rehabilitation , 28: 1350–1359, 2018. [102] Anne E Manktelow, David K Menon, Barbara J Sahakian, and Emmanuel A Stamatakis. Working memory after traumatic brain injury: The neural basis of improved performance with methylphenidate. Frontiers in Be-havioral Neuroscience , 11, 2017. ISSN 1662-5153. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00058. URL http://journal. frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00058/full. PMID: 28424597 Citation Key: Manktelow2017. [103] Susan Whitfield-Gabrieli and Alfonso Nieto-Castanon. Conn: A Functional Connectivity Toolbox for Corre-lated and Anticorrelated Brain Networks. Brain Con-nectivity , 2(3):125–141, 2012. ISSN 21580022. doi: 10.1089/brain.2012.0073. Citation Key: Whitfield-Gabrieli. [104] Behzadi Y, Restom K, Liau J, and Liu TT. A component based noise correction method (compcor) for bold and perfusion based fmri. NeuroImage , 37:90–101, 2007. [105] Jonathan D Power, Kelly A Barnes, Abraham Z Snyder, Bradley L Schlaggar, and Steven E Petersen. Spuri-ous but systematic correlations in functional connectiv-ity mri networks arise from subject motion. NeuroIm-age , 59(3):2142–2154, 2012. ISSN 10538119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.018. PMID: 22019881 arXiv: NIHMS150003 Citation Key: Power2012 ISBN: 1095-9572 (Electronic)\r1053-8119 (Linking). [106] Jonathan D Power, Anish Mitra, Timothy O Laumann, Abraham Z Snyder, Bradley L Schlaggar, and Steven E Petersen. Methods to detect, characterize, and re-move motion artifact in resting state fmri. Neu-roImage , 84:320–341, 2014. ISSN 10538119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.048. PMID: 23994314. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29 

[107] Kevin Murphy and Michael D. Fox. Towards a con-sensus regarding global signal regression for rest-ing state functional connectivity mri. NeuroImage ,154:169–173, 7 2017. ISSN 10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.11.052. PMID: 27888059 publisher: Neuroimage. [108] Jingwei Li, Taylor Bolt, Danilo Bzdok, Jason S Nomi, BT Thomas Yeo, R Nathan Spreng, and Lucina Q Ud-din. Topography and behavioral relevance of the global signal in the human brain. Scientific reports , 9(1):14286, 2019. [109] Sean Tanabe, Zirui Huang, Jun Zhang, Yali Chen, Stu-art Fogel, Julien Doyon, Jinsong Wu, Jianghui Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Pengmin Qin, Xuehai Wu, Ying Mao, George A. Mashour, Anthony G. Hudetz, and Georg Northoff. Altered global brain signal during physi-ologic, pharmacologic, and pathologic states of un-consciousness in humans and rats. Anesthesiology ,pages 1392–1406, 2020. ISSN 15281175. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0000000000003197. [110] Rahul S Desikan, Florent Ségonne, Bruce Fischl, Brian T Quinn, Bradford C Dickerson, Deborah Blacker, Randy L Buckner, Anders M Dale, R Paul Maguire, Bradley T Hy-man, et al. An automated labeling system for subdivid-ing the human cerebral cortex on mri scans into gyral based regions of interest. Neuroimage , 31(3):968–980, 2006. [111] Mark Jenkinson, Peter Bannister, Michael Brady, and Stephen Smith. Improved optimization for the robust and accurate linear registration and motion correction of brain images. Neuroimage , 17(2):825–841, 2002. [112] Theodore D. Satterthwaite, Mark A. Elliott, Raphael T. Gerraty, Kosha Ruparel, James Loughead, Monica E. Calkins, Simon B. Eickhoff, et al. An improved frame-work for confound regression and filtering for control of motion artifact in the preprocessing of resting-state functional connectivity data. NeuroImage , 64:240–256, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.08.052. [113] Rémi Patriat, Richard C. Reynolds, and Rasmus M. Birn. An improved model of motion-related signal changes in fmri. NeuroImage , 144:74–82, 2017. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.08.051. [114] Sharna D Jamadar, Phillip GD Ward, Emma X Liang, Edwina R Orchard, Zhaolin Chen, and Gary F Egan. Metabolic and hemodynamic resting-state connectivity of the human brain: a high-temporal resolution simulta-neous bold-fmri and fdg-fpet multimodality study. Cere-bral Cortex , 31(6):2855–2867, 2021. [115] Sharna D Jamadar, Phillip GD Ward, Emma X Liang, Edwina R Orchard, Zhaolin Chen, and Gary F Egan. Metabolic and hemodynamic resting-state connectivity of the human brain: a high-temporal resolution simulta-neous bold-fmri and fdg-fpet multimodality study. Cere-bral Cortex , 31(6):2855–2867, 2021. [116] Katharina Voigt, Emma X Liang, Bratislav Misic, Phillip G D Ward, Gary F Egan, and Sharna D Jamadar. Metabolic and functional connectivity provide unique and complementary insights into cognition-connectome relationships. Cerebral Cortex , 2022. [117] Ninon Burgos, M Jorge Cardoso, Kris Thielemans, Marc Modat, Stefano Pedemonte, John Dickson, Anna Barnes, Rebekah Ahmed, Colin J Mahoney, Jonathan M Schott, et al. Attenuation correction synthesis for hybrid pet-mr scanners: application to brain studies. IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 33(12):2332–2341, 2014. [118] Sharna D Jamadar, Phillip GD Ward, Thomas G Close, Alex Fornito, Malin Premaratne, Kieran O’Brien, Daniel Stäb, Zhaolin Chen, N Jon Shah, and Gary F Egan. Si-multaneous bold-fmri and constant infusion fdg-pet data of the resting human brain. Scientific data , 7(1):1–12, 2020. [119] David C Van Essen, Stephen M Smith, Deanna M Barch, Timothy EJ Behrens, Essa Yacoub, Kamil Ugurbil, Wu-Minn HCP Consortium, et al. The wu-minn human con-nectome project: an overview. Neuroimage , 80:62–79, 2013. [120] François Tadel, Sylvain Baillet, John C Mosher, Dim-itrios Pantazis, and Richard M Leahy. Brainstorm: auser-friendly application for meg/eeg analysis. Compu-tational intelligence and neuroscience , 2011, 2011. [121] Giles L Colclough, Mark W Woolrich, PK Tewarie, Matthew J Brookes, Andrew J Quinn, and Stephen M Smith. How reliable are meg resting-state connectivity metrics? Neuroimage , 138:284–293, 2016. [122] Meher R Juttukonda, Binyin Li, Randa Almaktoum, Kimberly A Stephens, Kathryn M Yochim, Essa Yacoub, Randy L Buckner, and David H Salat. Characterizing cerebral hemodynamics across the adult lifespan with arterial spin labeling mri data from the human connec-tome project-aging. Neuroimage , 230:117807, 2021. [123] Thomas F. Kirk, Flora A. Kennedy McConnell, Jack Toner, Martin S. Craig, Davide Carone, Xiufeng Li, Yuriko Suzuki, Timothy S. Coalson, Michael P. Harms, Matthew F. Glasser, and Michael A. Chappell. Arterial spin labelling perfusion mri analysis for the human con-nectome project lifespan ageing and development stud-ies. Imaging Neuroscience , 3, 01 2025. ISSN 2837-6056. doi:10.1162/imag_a_00444. [124] Michael P Harms, Leah H Somerville, Beau M Ances, Jesper Andersson, Deanna M Barch, Matteo Bastiani, Su-san Y Bookheimer, Timothy B Brown, Randy L Buckner, Gregory C Burgess, et al. Extending the human con-nectome project across ages: Imaging protocols for the lifespan development and aging projects. Neuroimage ,183:972–984, 2018. [125] Leah H Somerville, Susan Y Bookheimer, Randy L Buck-ner, Gregory C Burgess, Sandra W Curtiss, Mirella Dapretto, Jennifer Stine Elam, Michael S Gaffrey, Michael P Harms, Cynthia Hodge, et al. The lifespan hu-man connectome project in development: A large-scale study of brain connectivity development in 5–21 year olds. Neuroimage , 183:456–468, 2018. [126] Susan Y Bookheimer, David H Salat, Melissa Terpstra, Beau M Ances, Deanna M Barch, Randy L Buckner, Gre-gory C Burgess, Sandra W Curtiss, Mirella Diaz-Santos, 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

30 

Jennifer Stine Elam, et al. The lifespan human connec-tome project in aging: an overview. Neuroimage , 185: 335–348, 2019. [127] Jie Lisa Ji, Jure Demšar, Clara Fonteneau, Zailyn Tamayo, Lining Pan, Aleksij Kraljiˇ c, Andraž Matkoviˇ c, Nina Purg, Markus Helmer, Shaun Warrington, et al. Qunex—an integrative platform for reproducible neu-roimaging analytics. Frontiers in Neuroinformatics , 17: 1104508, 2023. [128] Yuriko Suzuki, Thomas W Okell, Michael A Chappell, and Matthias JP van Osch. A framework for motion cor-rection of background suppressed arterial spin labeling perfusion images acquired with simultaneous multi-slice epi. Magnetic resonance in medicine , 81(3):1553–1565, 2019. [129] Michael A Chappell, Thomas F Kirk, Martin S Craig, Flora A Kennedy McConnell, Moss Y Zhao, Bradley J MacIntosh, Thomas W Okell, and Mark W Woolrich. Basil: A toolbox for perfusion quantification using arte-rial spin labelling. Imaging Neuroscience , 1:1–16, 2023. [130] Richard B Buxton, Lawrence R Frank, Eric C Wong, Bet-tina Siewert, Steven Warach, and Robert R Edelman. A general kinetic model for quantitative perfusion imag-ing with arterial spin labeling. Magnetic resonance in medicine , 40(3):383–396, 1998. [131] Michael A Chappell, Adrian R Groves, Bradley J Mac-Intosh, Manus J Donahue, Peter Jezzard, and Mark W Woolrich. Partial volume correction of multiple inver-sion time arterial spin labeling mri data. Magnetic reso-nance in medicine , 65(4):1173–1183, 2011. [132] Joana Pinto, Michael A Chappell, Thomas W Okell, Melvin Mezue, Andrew R Segerdahl, Irene Tracey, Pe-dro Vilela, and Patrícia Figueiredo. Calibration of arterial spin labeling data—potential pitfalls in post-processing. Magnetic resonance in medicine , 83(4):1222– 1234, 2020. [133] Bruce Fischl. Freesurfer. Neuroimage , 62(2):774–781, 2012. [134] Thomas F Kirk, Timothy S Coalson, Martin S Craig, and Michael A Chappell. Toblerone: surface-based partial volume estimation. IEEE transactions on medical imag-ing , 39(5):1501–1510, 2019. [135] Matthew F Glasser, Stamatios N Sotiropoulos, J Anthony Wilson, Timothy S Coalson, Bruce Fischl, Jesper L An-dersson, Junqian Xu, Saad Jbabdi, Matthew Webster, Jonathan R Polimeni, et al. The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the human connectome project. Neuroim-age , 80:105–124, 2013. [136] Emma C Robinson, Saad Jbabdi, Matthew F Glasser, Jes-per Andersson, Gregory C Burgess, Michael P Harms, Stephen M Smith, David C Van Essen, and Mark Jenk-inson. Msm: a new flexible framework for multimodal surface matching. Neuroimage , 100:414–426, 2014. [137] Matthew F Glasser, Timothy S Coalson, Emma C Robin-son, Carl D Hacker, John Harwell, Essa Yacoub, Kamil Ugurbil, Jesper Andersson, Christian F Beckmann, Mark Jenkinson, et al. A multi-modal parcellation of human cerebral cortex. Nature , 536(7615):171–178, 2016. [138] Emma C Robinson, Kara Garcia, Matthew F Glasser, Zhengdao Chen, Timothy S Coalson, Antonios Makropoulos, Jelena Bozek, Robert Wright, Andreas Schuh, Matthew Webster, et al. Multimodal surface matching with higher-order smoothness constraints. 

Neuroimage , 167:453–465, 2018. [139] Andrea I Luppi, Zhen-Qi Liu, Justine Y Hansen, Ro-drigo Cofre, Meiqi Niu, Elena Kuzmin, Seán Froudist-Walsh, Nicola Palomero-Gallagher, and Bratislav Misic. Benchmarking macaque brain gene expression for hori-zontal and vertical translation. Science Advances , 11(9): eads6967, 2025. [140] Ross D Markello, Aurina Arnatkeviciute, Jean-Baptiste Poline, Ben D Fulcher, Alex Fornito, and Bratislav Misic. Standardizing workflows in imaging transcrip-tomics with the abagen toolbox. Elife , 10:e72129, 2021. [141] Simon Kaller, Michael Rullmann, Marianne Patt, Georg Becker, Julia Luthardt, Johanna Girbardt, Philipp Meyer, Peter Werner, Henryk Barthel, Anke McLeod, Thomas Fritz, Swen Hesse, and Osama Sabri. Test–retest mea-surements of dopamine d1-type receptors using simul-taneous pet/mri imaging. European Journal of Nu-clear Medicine and Molecular Imaging , 44, 6 2017. doi: 10.1007/s00259-017-3645-0. [142] Christine M. Sandiego, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Ke-unpoong Lim, Jim Ropchan, Shu-fei Lin, Hong Gao, Evan D. Morris, and Kelly P. Cosgrove. Reference re-gion modeling approaches for amphetamine challenge studies with [11c]flb 457 and pet. Journal of Cere-bral Blood Flow and Metabolism: Official Journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism , 35(4):623–629, 3 2015. ISSN 1559-7016. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2014.237. PMID: 25564239 PMCID: PMC4420880. [143] Mark Slifstein, Elsmarieke van de Giessen, Jared Van Snellenberg, Judy L. Thompson, Rajesh Narendran, Roberto Gil, Elizabeth Hackett, Ragy Girgis, Najate Ojeil, Holly Moore, Deepak D’Souza, Robert T. Malison, Yiyun Huang, Keunpoong Lim, Nabeel Nabulsi, Richard E. Car-son, Jeffrey A. Lieberman, and Anissa Abi-Dargham. Deficits in prefrontal cortical and extrastriatal dopamine release in schizophrenia: a positron emission tomo-graphic functional magnetic resonance imaging study. 

JAMA psychiatry , 72(4):316–324, 4 2015. ISSN 2168-6238. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.2414. PMID: 25651194 PMCID: PMC4768742. [144] Christopher T. Smith, Jennifer L. Crawford, Linh C. Dang, Kendra L. Seaman, M. Danica San Juan, Aish-warya Vijay, Daniel T. Katz, David Matuskey, Ronald L. Cowan, Evan D. Morris, David H. Zald, and Gregory R. Samanez-Larkin. Partial-volume correction increases estimated dopamine d2-like receptor binding potential and reduces adult age differences. Journal of Cere-bral Blood Flow and Metabolism: Official Journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism , 39(5):822–833, 5 2019. ISSN 1559-7016. doi:10.1177/0271678X17737693. PMID: 29090626 PMCID: PMC6498753. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

31 

[145] Yasmin Zakiniaeiz, Ansel T. Hillmer, David Matuskey, Nabeel Nabulsi, Jim Ropchan, Carolyn M. Mazure, Marina R. Picciotto, Yiyun Huang, Sherry A. McKee, Evan D. Morris, and Kelly P. Cosgrove. Sex differences in amphetamine-induced dopamine release in the dor-solateral prefrontal cortex of tobacco smokers. Neu-ropsychopharmacology: Official Publication of the Ameri-can College of Neuropsychopharmacology , 44(13):2205– 2211, 12 2019. ISSN 1740-634X. doi:10.1038/s41386-019-0456-y. PMID: 31269510 PMCID: PMC6897943. [146] Juergen Dukart, Štefan Holiga, Christopher Chatham, Peter Hawkins, Anna Forsyth, Rebecca McMillan, Jim Myers, Anne R. Lingford-Hughes, David J. Nutt, Emilio Merlo-Pich, Celine Risterucci, Lauren Boak, Daniel Um-bricht, Scott Schobel, Thomas Liu, Mitul A. Mehta, Fer-nando O. Zelaya, Steve C. Williams, Gregory Brown, Martin Paulus, Garry D. Honey, Suresh Muthuku-maraswamy, Joerg Hipp, Alessandro Bertolino, and Fabio Sambataro. Cerebral blood flow predicts differ-ential neurotransmitter activity. Scientific Reports , 8(1): 4074, 3 2018. ISSN 2045-2322. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-22444-0. PMID: 29511260 PMCID: PMC5840131. [147] Renata Belfort-DeAguiar, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Jan-ice J Hwang, Ahmed Elshafie, Catherine W Yeckel, Owen Chan, Richard E Carson, Yu-Shin Ding, and Robert S Sherwin. Noradrenergic activity in the human brain: A mechanism supporting the defense against hypo-glycemia. The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism , 103(6):2244–2252, 6 2018. ISSN 0021-972X. doi:10.1210/jc.2017-02717. [148] Yu-Shin Ding, Tarun Singhal, Beata Planeta-Wilson, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Nabeel Nabulsi, David Laba-ree, Jim Ropchan, Shannan Henry, Wendol Williams, Richard E. Carson, Alexander Neumeister, and Robert T. Malison. Pet imaging of the effects of age and cocaine on the norepinephrine transporter in the human brain using (s,s)-[(11)c]o-methylreboxetine and hrrt. Synapse (New York, N.Y.) , 64(1):30–38, 1 2010. ISSN 1098-2396. doi:10.1002/syn.20696. PMID: 19728366 PM-CID: PMC3727644. [149] Chiang-shan R. Li, Marc N. Potenza, Dianne E. Lee, Beata Planeta, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, David Laba-ree, Shannan Henry, Nabeel Nabulsi, Rajita Sinha, Yu-Shin Ding, Richard E. Carson, and Alexander Neumeis-ter. Decreased norepinephrine transporter availabil-ity in obesity: Positron emission tomography imag-ing with (s,s)-[(11)c]o-methylreboxetine. NeuroIm-age , 86:306–310, 2 2014. ISSN 1095-9572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.004. PMID: 24121204 PMCID: PMC3947246. [150] Elizabeth Sanchez-Rangel, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Catherine W. Yeckel, Wai Lam, Renata Belfort-DeAguiar, Ming-Kai Chen, Richard E. Carson, Robert Sherwin, and Janice J. Hwang. Norepinephrine transporter availabil-ity in brown fat is reduced in obesity: a human pet study with [11c] mrb. International Journal of Obe-sity , 44(4):964–967, 4 2020. ISSN 1476-5497. doi: 10.1038/s41366-019-0471-4. number: 4 publisher: Na-ture Publishing Group. [151] Markus Savli, Andreas Bauer, Markus Mitterhauser, Yu-Shin Ding, Andreas Hahn, Tina Kroll, Alexander Neumeister, Daniela Haeusler, Johanna Ungersboeck, Shannan Henry, Sanaz Attaripour Isfahani, Frank Rattay, Wolfgang Wadsak, Siegfried Kasper, and Rupert Lanzen-berger. Normative database of the serotonergic system in healthy subjects using multi-tracer pet. NeuroIm-age , 63(1):447–459, 10 2012. ISSN 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.001. [152] Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Nabeel Nabulsi, Alexander Neumeister, Beata Planeta-Wilson, Wendol A. Williams, Tarun Singhal, Sunhee Kim, R. Paul Maguire, Timothy McCarthy, J. James Frost, Yiyun Huang, Yu-Shin Ding, and Richard E. Carson. Kinetic modeling of the serotonin 5-ht(1b) receptor radioligand [(11)c]p943 in humans. 

Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism: Official Journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism , 30(1):196–210, 1 2010. ISSN 1559-7016. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2009.195. PMID: 19773803 PMCID: PMC2949107. [153] David Matuskey, Zubin Bhagwagar, Beata Planeta, Brian Pittman, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Jason Chen, Jane Wanyiri, Soheila Najafzadeh, Jim Ropchan, Paul Geha, Yiyun Huang, Marc N. Potenza, Alexander Neumeis-ter, Richard E. Carson, and Robert T. Malison. Re-ductions in brain 5-ht1b receptor availability in pri-marily cocaine-dependent humans. Biological Psychia-try , 76(10):816–822, 11 2014. ISSN 1873-2402. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.11.022. PMID: 24433854 PM-CID: PMC4037398. [154] James W. Murrough, Christoph Czermak, Shannan Henry, Nabeel Nabulsi, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Ral-itza Gueorguieva, Beata Planeta-Wilson, John H. Krys-tal, John F. Neumaier, Yiyun Huang, Yu-Shin Ding, Richard E. Carson, and Alexander Neumeister. The effect of early trauma exposure on serotonin type 1b receptor expression revealed by reduced selective radioligand binding. Archives of General Psychiatry ,68(9):892–900, 9 2011. ISSN 1538-3636. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.91. PMID: 21893657 PMCID: PMC3244836. [155] Christopher Pittenger, Thomas G. Adams, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Michael J. Crowley, Nabeel Nabulsi, null James Ropchan, Hong Gao, Stephen A. Kichuk, Ryan Simpson, Eileen Billingslea, Jonas Hannes-tad, Michael Bloch, Linda Mayes, Zubin Bhagwagar, and Richard E. Carson. Ocd is associated with an altered as-sociation between sensorimotor gating and cortical and subcortical 5-ht1b receptor binding. Journal of Affective Disorders , 196:87–96, 5 2016. ISSN 1573-2517. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.02.021. PMID: 26919057 PMCID: PMC4808438. [156] Aybala Saricicek, Jason Chen, Beata Planeta, Barbara Ruf, Kalyani Subramanyam, Kathleen Maloney, David Matuskey, David Labaree, Lorenz Deserno, Alexander Neumeister, John H. Krystal, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Yiyun Huang, Richard E. Carson, and Zubin Bhagwa-gar. Test-retest reliability of the novel 5-ht1b receptor pet radioligand [11c]p943. European Journal of Nu-clear Medicine and Molecular Imaging , 42(3):468–477, 3 2015. ISSN 1619-7089. doi:10.1007/s00259-014-2958-5. PMID: 25427881. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32 

[157] Vincent Beliveau, Melanie Ganz, Ling Feng, Brice Ozenne, Liselotte Højgaard, Patrick M. Fisher, Claus Svarer, Douglas N. Greve, and Gitte M. Knudsen. Ahigh-resolution in vivo atlas of the human brain’s sero-tonin system. The Journal of Neuroscience , 37(1):120, 1 2017. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2830-16.2016. PMID: 28053035 publisher: Society for Neuroscience. [158] Rajiv Radhakrishnan, Nabeel Nabulsi, Edward Gaiser, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Shannan Henry, Beata Plan-eta, Shu-fei Lin, Jim Ropchan, Wendol Williams, Evan Morris, Deepak Cyril D’Souza, Yiyun Huang, Richard E. Carson, and David Matuskey. Age-related change in 5-ht6 receptor availability in healthy male volunteers measured with 11c-gsk215083 pet. Journal of Nuclear Medicine , 59(9):1445–1450, 9 2018. ISSN 0161-5505. doi:10.2967/jnumed.117.206516. PMID: 29626125 PMCID: PMC6126437. [159] Rajiv Radhakrishnan, David Matuskey, Nabeel Nabulsi, Edward Gaiser, Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Shannan Henry, Beata Planeta, Shu-Fei Lin, Jim Ropchan, Yiyun Huang, Richard E. Carson, and Deepak Cyril D’Souza. In vivo 5-ht6 and 5-ht2a receptor avail-ability in antipsychotic treated schizophrenia pa-tients vs. unmedicated healthy humans measured with [11c]gsk215083 pet. Psychiatry Research. Neuroimag-ing , 295:111007, 1 2020. ISSN 1872-7506. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2019.111007. PMID: 31760336. [160] Stephen R. Baldassarri, Ansel T. Hillmer, Jon Mikael Anderson, Peter Jatlow, Nabeel Nabulsi, David Laba-ree, Kelly P. Cosgrove, Stephanie S. O’Malley, Thomas Eissenberg, Suchitra Krishnan-Sarin, and Irina Esterlis. Use of electronic cigarettes leads to significant beta2-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor occupancy: Evidence from a pet imaging study. Nicotine and Tobacco Re-search: Official Journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco , 20(4):425–433, 3 2018. ISSN 1469-994X. doi:10.1093/ntr/ntx091. PMID: 28460123 PMCID: PMC5896427. [161] A. T. Hillmer, I. Esterlis, J. D. Gallezot, F. Bois, M. Q. Zheng, N. Nabulsi, S. F. Lin, R. L. Papke, Y. Huang, O. Sabri, R. E. Carson, and K. P. Cosgrove. Imaging of cerebral alpha4beta2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors with (-)-[(18)f]flubatine pet: Implementation of bolus plus constant infusion and sensitivity to acetylcholine in human brain. NeuroImage , 141:71–80, 11 2016. ISSN 1095-9572. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.07.026. PMID: 27426839 PMCID: PMC5026941. [162] Mika Naganawa, Nabeel Nabulsi, Shannan Henry, David Matuskey, Shu-Fei Lin, Lawrence Slieker, Adam J. Schwarz, Nancy Kant, Cynthia Jesudason, Kevin Ru-ley, Antonio Navarro, Hong Gao, Jim Ropchan, David Labaree, Richard E. Carson, and Yiyun Huang. First-in-human assessment of 11c-lsn3172176, an m1 mus-carinic acetylcholine receptor pet radiotracer. Journal of Nuclear Medicine: Official Publication, Society of Nuclear Medicine , 62(4):553–560, 4 2021. ISSN 1535-5667. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.120.246967. PMID: 32859711 PM-CID: PMC8049371. [163] M. Aghourian, C. Legault-Denis, J.-P. Soucy, P. Rosa-Neto, S. Gauthier, A. Kostikov, P. Gravel, and M.-A. Bé-dard. Quantification of brain cholinergic denervation in alzheimer’s disease using pet imaging with [18f]-feobv. Molecular Psychiatry , 22(11):1531–1538, 11 2017. ISSN 1476-5578. doi:10.1038/mp.2017.183. PMID: 28894304. [164] Marc-Andre Bedard, Meghmik Aghourian, Camille Legault-Denis, Ronald B. Postuma, Jean-Paul Soucy, Jean-François Gagnon, Amélie Pelletier, and Jacques Montplaisir. Brain cholinergic alterations in idiopathic rem sleep behaviour disorder: a pet imaging study with 18f-feobv. Sleep Medicine , 58:35–41, 6 2019. ISSN 1878-5506. doi:10.1016/j.sleep.2018.12.020. PMID: 31078078. [165] Jonathan M. DuBois, Olivier G. Rousset, Jared Row-ley, Manuel Porras-Betancourt, Andrew J. Reader, Au-relie Labbe, Gassan Massarweh, Jean-Paul Soucy, Pedro Rosa-Neto, and Eliane Kobayashi. Characterization of age/sex and the regional distribution of mglur5 avail-ability in the healthy human brain measured by high-resolution [(11)c]abp688 pet. European Journal of Nu-clear Medicine and Molecular Imaging , 43(1):152–162, 1 2016. ISSN 1619-7089. doi:10.1007/s00259-015-3167-6. PMID: 26290423. [166] Kelly Smart, Sylvia M. L. Cox, Stephanie G. Scala, Maria Tippler, Natalia Jaworska, Michel Boivin, Jean R. Séguin, Chawki Benkelfat, and Marco Leyton. Sex dif-ferences in [11c]abp688 binding: a positron emission tomography study of mglu5 receptors. European Journal of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging , 46(5):1179– 1183, 2019. ISSN 1619-7070. doi:10.1007/s00259-018-4252-4. PMID: 30627817 PMCID: PMC6451701. [167] Marian Galovic, Adam Al-Diwani, Umesh Vivekananda, Francisco Torrealdea, Kjell Erlandsson, Tim D. Fryer, Young T. Hong, Benjamin A. Thomas, Colm J. McGin-nity, Evan Edmond, Kerstin Sander, Erik Årstad, Il-ijas Jelcic, Franklin I. Aigbirhio, Ashley M. Groves, Kris Thielemans, Brian Hutton, Alexander Hammers, John S. Duncan, Jonathan P. Coles, Anna Barnes, Charlotte J. Stagg, Matthew C. Walker, Sarosh R. Irani, Matthias J. Koepp, and for the NEST In-vestigators. In vivo nmda receptor function in people with nmda receptor antibody encephalitis. 

medRxiv , 12 2021. doi:10.1101/2021.12.04.21267226. URL https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021. 12.04.21267226v1. page: 2021.12.04.21267226. [168] Marian Galovic, Kjell Erlandsson, Tim D. Fryer, Young T. Hong, Roido Manavaki, Hasan Sari, Sarah Chetcuti, Benjamin A. Thomas, Martin Fisher, Selena Sephton, Roberto Canales, Joseph J. Russell, Kerstin Sander, Erik Årstad, Franklin I. Aigbirhio, Ashley M. Groves, John S. Duncan, Kris Thielemans, Brian F. Hutton, Jonathan P. Coles, Matthias J. Koepp, and NEST investigators. Val-idation of a combined image derived input function and venous sampling approach for the quantification of [18f]ge-179 pet binding in the brain. NeuroIm-age , 237:118194, 8 2021. ISSN 1095-9572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118194. PMID: 34023451. [169] Martin Nørgaard, Vincent Beliveau, Melanie Ganz, Claus Svarer, Lars Pinborg, Sune Keller, Peter Jensen, Douglas Greve, and Gitte Knudsen. A high-resolution in vivo at-

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

33 

las of the human brain’s benzodiazepine binding site of gaba a receptors. NeuroImage , 232:117878, 2021. doi: 10.1101/2020.04.10.035352. ISBN: 4535456720. [170] Jean-Dominique Gallezot, Beata Planeta, Nabeel Nabulsi, Donna Palumbo, Xiaoxi Li, Jing Liu, Carolyn Rowinski, Kristin Chidsey, David Labaree, Jim Ropchan, Shu-Fei Lin, Aarti Sawant-Basak, Timothy J. McCarthy, Anne W. Schmidt, Yiyun Huang, and Richard E. Carson. Determination of receptor occupancy in the presence of mass dose: [11c]gsk189254 pet imaging of histamine h3 receptor occupancy by pf-03654746. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism: Official Journal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism , 37(3):1095–1107, 3 2017. ISSN 1559-7016. doi:10.1177/0271678X16650697. PMID: 27207170 PMCID: PMC5363483. [171] Deepak Cyril D’Souza, Jose A. Cortes-Briones, Mo-hini Ranganathan, Halle Thurnauer, Gina Creatura, Toral Surti, Beata Planeta, Alexander Neumeister, Brian Pittman, Marc Normandin, Michael Kapinos, Jim Ropchan, Yiyun Huang, Richard E. Carson, and Patrick D. Skosnik. Rapid changes in cb1 receptor avail-ability in cannabis dependent males after abstinence from cannabis. Biological Psychiatry. Cognitive Neuro-science and Neuroimaging , 1(1):60–67, 1 2016. ISSN 2451-9022. doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2015.09.008. PMID: 26858993 PMCID: PMC4742341. [172] Alexander Neumeister, Marc D. Normandin, James W. Murrough, Shannan Henry, Christopher R. Bailey, David A. Luckenbaugh, Keri Tuit, Ming-Qiang Zheng, Isaac R. Galatzer-Levy, Rajita Sinha, Richard E. Car-son, Marc N. Potenza, and Yiyun Huang. Positron emission tomography shows elevated cannabinoid cb1 receptor binding in men with alcohol dependence. 

Alcoholism, Clinical and Experimental Research , 36 (12):2104–2109, 12 2012. ISSN 1530-0277. doi: 10.1111/j.1530-0277.2012.01815.x. PMID: 22551199 PMCID: PMC3418442. [173] Marc D. Normandin, Ming-Qiang Zheng, Kuo-Shyan Lin, N. Scott Mason, Shu-Fei Lin, Jim Ropchan, David Laba-ree, Shannan Henry, Wendol A. Williams, Richard E. Car-son, Alexander Neumeister, and Yiyun Huang. Imag-ing the cannabinoid cb1 receptor in humans with [11c]omar: assessment of kinetic analysis methods, test-retest reproducibility, and gender differences. Journal of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism: Official Jour-nal of the International Society of Cerebral Blood Flow and Metabolism , 35(8):1313–1322, 8 2015. ISSN 1559-7016. doi:10.1038/jcbfm.2015.46. PMID: 25833345 PMCID: PMC4528005. [174] Mohini Ranganathan, Jose Cortes-Briones, Rajiv Rad-hakrishnan, Halle Thurnauer, Beata Planeta, Patrick Skosnik, Hong Gao, David Labaree, Alexander Neumeis-ter, Brian Pittman, Toral Surti, Yiyun Huang, Richard E. Carson, and Deepak Cyril D’Souza. Reduced brain cannabinoid receptor availability in schizophre-nia. Biological Psychiatry , 79(12):997–1005, 6 2016. ISSN 1873-2402. doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2015.08.021. PMID: 26432420 PMCID: PMC4884543. [175] Tatu Kantonen, Tomi Karjalainen, Janne Isojärvi, Pirjo Nuutila, Jouni Tuisku, Juha Rinne, Jarmo Hietala, Valtteri Kaasinen, Kari Kalliokoski, Harry Scheinin, Jussi Hirvonen, Aki Vehtari, and Lauri Nummen-maa. Interindividual variability and lateralization of mu-opioid receptors in the human brain. NeuroIm-age , 217:116922, 8 2020. ISSN 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116922. [176] Casey Paquola, Jessica Royer, Lindsay B Lewis, Claude Lepage, Tristan Glatard, Konrad Wagstyl, Jordan DeKraker, Paule-J Toussaint, Sofie L Valk, Louis Collins, et al. The bigbrainwarp toolbox for integration of big-brain 3d histology with multimodal neuroimaging. Elife ,10:e70119, 2021. [177] Russell A Poldrack, Aniket Kittur, Donald Kalar, Eric Miller, Christian Seppa, Yolanda Gil, D Stott Parker, Fred W Sabb, and Robert M Bilder. The cognitive at-las: toward a knowledge foundation for cognitive neu-roscience. Frontiers in neuroinformatics , 5:17, 2011. [178] Aaron F. Alexander-Bloch, Haochang Shou, Siyuan Liu, Theodore D. Satterthwaite, David C. Glahn, Russell T. Shinohara, Simon N. Vandekar, and Armin Raznahan. On testing for spatial correspondence between maps of human brain structure and function. NeuroIm-age , 178:540–551, 9 2018. ISSN 10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.05.070. PMID: 29860082 publisher: Academic Press Inc. [179] Justine Y. Hansen, Ross D. Markello, Jacob W. Vogel, Jakob Seidlitz, Danilo Bzdok, and Bratislav Misic. Map-ping gene transcription and neurocognition across hu-man neocortex. Nature Human Behaviour , pages 1–11, 3 2021. ISSN 2397-3374. doi:10.1038/s41562-021-01082-z. publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [180] Ross D Markello and Bratislav Misic. Comparing spatial null models for brain maps. NeuroImage , 236:118052, 2021. [181] Peter T Fox and Jack L Lancaster. Mapping context and content: the brainmap model. Nature Reviews Neuro-science , 3(4):319–321, 2002. [182] David C Van Essen, Stephen M Smith, Deanna M Barch, Timothy E.J. Behrens, Essa Yacoub, and Kamil Ugurbil. The wu-minn human connectome project: An overview. 

NeuroImage , 80:62–79, 2013. ISSN 10538119. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.041. PMID: 23684880. [183] Matthew F Glasser, Stamatios N Sotiropoulos, Anthony Wilson, Timothy S Coalson, Bruce Fischl, Jesper L An-dersson, Junqian Xu, Saad Jbabdi, Matthew Webster, Jonathan R Polimeni, David C Van Essen, and Mark Jenkinson. The minimal preprocessing pipelines for the human connectome project. Neuroimage , 80:105–124, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.127. [184] Fang-Cheng Yeh, Sandip Panesar, David Fernandes, An-tonio Meola, Masanori Yoshino, Juan C Fernandez-Miranda, Jean M Vettel, and Timothy Verstynen. Population-averaged atlas of the macroscale human structural connectome and its network topology. Neu-roImage , 178:57–68, 2018. ISSN 10959572. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.05.027. PMID: 29758339. [185] Fang-Cheng Yeh, Van Jay Wedeen, and Wen-Yih Isaac 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 10, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.07.730661 doi: bioRxiv preprint

34 

Tseng. Estimation of fiber orientation and spin den-sity distribution by diffusion deconvolution. NeuroIm-age , 55(3):1054–1062, 4 2011. ISSN 1053-8119. doi: 10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2010.11.087. publisher: Aca-demic Press. [186] Fang-Cheng Yeh, T D Verstynen, Y Wang, J CFernández-Miranda, and W-Yi Tseng. Determinis-tic diffusion fiber tracking improved by quantitative anisotropy. PLoS ONE , 8(11):80713, 2013. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080713. [187] Andrea I Luppi and Emmanuel A Stamatakis. Combin-ing network topology and information theory to con-struct representative brain networks. Network Neuro-science , 5(1):96–124, 2021. ISSN 2472-1751. doi: 10.1162/netn_a_00170. [188] Richard F Betzel, Alessandra Griffa, Patric Hagmann, and Bratislav Miši´ c. Distance-dependent consensus thresholds for generating group-representative struc-tural brain networks. Network neuroscience , 3(2):475– 496, 2019. [189] Bratislav Miši´ c, Richard F Betzel, Azadeh Nematzadeh, Joaquin Goni, Alessandra Griffa, Patric Hagmann, Alessandro Flammini, Yong-Yeol Ahn, and Olaf Sporns. Cooperative and competitive spreading dynamics on the human connectome. Neuron , 86(6):1518–1529, 2015. [190] Olivier David, Anne-Sophie Job, Luca De Palma, Do-minique Hoffmann, Lorella Minotti, and Philippe Ka-hane. Probabilistic functional tractography of the human cortex. Neuroimage , 80:307–317, 2013. [191] Lena Trebaul, Pierre Deman, Viateur Tuyisenge, Maciej Jedynak, Etienne Hugues, David Rudrauf, Manik Bhat-tacharjee, François Tadel, Blandine Chanteloup-Foret, Carole Saubat, et al. Probabilistic functional tractogra-phy of the human cortex revisited. Neuroimage , 181: 414–429, 2018. 

Supplementary Materials