Title: A common connectome-based neural reference space across affective, autonomic, and wakefulness arousal

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 30

Markdown Content:
A common connectome-based neural reference space across affective, autonomic, and wakefulness arousal 

Short Title: Common connectome-based neural reference space of arousal 

Authors: 

Kannon Bhattacharyya 1† , Judah Huberman-Shlaes 2† , Yulin Tong 3, Yuxuan Zhu 3, Jin Ke 4, Jadyn S. Park 3,5 , Anna Corriveau 3,5 , Monica D. Rosenberg 3,5,6 , Yuan Chang Leong* 3,5,6 

Affiliations 

> 1

Department of Psychiatry, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 

> 2

University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine 

> 3

Department of Psychology, University of Chicago 

> 4

Department of Psychology, Yale University 

> 5

Institute of Mind and Biology, University of Chicago 

> 6

Neuroscience Institute, University of Chicago  

> †

These authors contributed equally 

* Correspondence should be addressed to Yuan Chang Leong ( ycleong@uchicago.edu )

Author Contributions: K.B.: Conceptualization, Data Curation, Methodology, Investigation, Software, Formal Analysis, Visualization, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing. 

J.H.S.: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Software, Formal Analysis, Writing -Original Draft. Y.T.: Software, Formal Analysis, Writing - Review & Editing. Y.Z.: Software, Formal Analysis. J.K.: Software, Writing - Review & Editing. J.S.P.: Software, Writing -Review & Editing. A.C.: Methodology, Software, Writing - Review & Editing. M.D.R.: 

Conceptualization, Methodology, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision. Y.C.L.: 

Conceptualization, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Supervision, Project Administration 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Abstract 

Arousal is often invoked to explain state-dependent variability in attention, emotion, memory, and decision-making. However, the term is used inconsistently, referring variously to affective experience, autonomic activation, and states of wakefulness. The extent to which different operationalizations of arousal reflect a shared neurobiological basis remains unclear, limiting efforts to unify findings across studies. We applied dynamic connectome predictive models to five fMRI datasets spanning naturalistic movie watching, story listening, wakeful rest, and sleep. We derived measures of affective, autonomic, and wakefulness arousal from subjective ratings, pupil dilation, and EEG, respectively. Models trained to predict arousal in one dataset generalized across datasets, indicating that dynamic connectivity captures shared arousal-related dynamics across measures and task contexts. The models also predicted manually scored sleep stages, suggesting that they capture arousal dynamics that extend to the graded fluctuations in arousal during sleep. Decoded arousal dynamics during movie-viewing predicted how well participants later recalled movie events, reproducing classic arousal-dependent memory enhancement effects. Model predictions were supported by overlapping functional connections, including a subset shared across all models. The largest proportion of shared connections was between the salience and somatomotor networks, suggesting that increased coordination between salience detection and action readiness may be a common feature across multiple operationalizations of arousal. Together, these results are consistent with a connectome-based neural reference space for arousal, in which different varieties share a core set of predictive connections. Our findings offer a quantitative framework for integrating arousal-related findings across tasks and modalities. 

Keywords: arousal, fMRI, pupillometry, EEG, connectome-based predictive models 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Introduction 

The quickened pulse before an exam, the restless wakefulness in the middle of the night, and the sharpened focus in a high-stakes moment are thought to reflect fluctuations in arousal. Broadly defined as a state of heightened activation, arousal has been proposed as a core explanatory factor across models of attention [1–4], emotion [5,6], learning [7,8], memory [9–12], and decision-making [13–16]. Yet, what counts as “arousal” varies considerably across studies and theories [17]. In some contexts, the term refers to a subjective experience, such as feeling excited, anxious, or emotionally charged [18,19]. In others, it refers to autonomic nervous system activity, including changes in heart rate, pupil dilation, or skin conductance [20–23]. Arousal has also been used to describe states of wakefulness, spanning anesthesia, sleep, drowsiness, and full alertness [24–26]. This heterogeneity has led critics to question the construct’s scientific utility, arguing that collapsing distinct processes under a single label obscures mechanistic specificity and hinders theoretical progress [27–30]. 

In light of these critiques, a reasonable response would be to abandon the umbrella term “arousal” altogether in favor of more specific constructs (e.g., affective intensity, autonomic activation, vigilance). However, this risks obscuring potential commonalities across varieties of arousal and discarding the cumulative insights gained from decades of arousal research. Indeed, the persistent use of the term suggests an intuitive recognition that these phenomena may be meaningfully related. Rather than replacing arousal with a set of narrower terms, we take a complementary approach and ask whether common structure can be empirically identified across different types of arousal. We draw on the concept of a neural reference space [31], conceptualized as the pattern of neural responses that are probabilistically involved in realizing a class of mental events. A neural reference space of arousal would allow researchers to situate different operationalizations of arousal within a shared space and test the extent to which they reflect shared processes. 

Recent efforts have begun to construct a neural reference space of arousal using comparative reviews [17] and meta-analytic approaches [32,33]. These studies have identified overlapping involvement of brainstem nuclei, including the locus coeruleus and dorsal raphe nucleus, the thalamus, and regions in the salience network, such as the anterior insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex. However, regional overlap does not guarantee that the same neural states underlie different varieties of arousal. A given region can support multiple functions depending on which neural populations are engaged and their pattern of connectivity with other regions. Indeed, a recent study [34] derived a distributed pattern of brain activity that predicts affective arousal across diverse tasks and stimuli. Although this pattern showed spatial overlap with many of the regions highlighted in prior meta-analytic maps of arousal, it did not generalize to predict autonomic activation or states of wakefulness. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Furthermore, studies that have empirically characterized neural reference spaces of arousal have primarily relied on activity patterns rather than interactions among brain regions (e.g., [34, 35]). Yet a growing literature indicates that arousal is closely tied to changes in functional connectivity [36–44]. For example, autonomic activation has been associated with increased connectivity within the salience network [40], as well as stronger coupling between salience network regions and the thalamus, brainstem, and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex [39]. Fluctuations in affective arousal have likewise been shown to covary with dynamic connectivity among large-scale functional networks, including salience, default mode, and frontoparietal control systems [37,41,45]. However, it remains unclear whether different varieties of arousal are supported by the same set of functional connections. 

In the current work, we use connectome-based predictive modeling to situate varieties of arousal in a shared functional connectivity space. Connectome predictive models (CPMs) predict individual traits or psychological states from whole-brain functional connectivity patterns [37,46–51]. We construct dynamic CPMs to predict continuous fluctuations in three varieties of arousal, following the taxonomy proposed by Satpute and colleagues [17]: affective arousal (subjective feelings of activation), autonomic arousal (peripheral physiological activity), and wakefulness arousal (vigilance and responsiveness). If a model trained on one variety of arousal successfully generalizes to another and relies on overlapping predictive connections, this would support the notion that different varieties of arousal reflect common underlying neural processes. We estimate these models in resting-state, movie-watching and story-listening fMRI to test whether intrinsic and stimulus-driven fluctuations in arousal are supported by a common set of functional connections. Generalization across movies, stories, and rest would indicate that the models are not merely tracking stimulus features associated with arousal or engagement with a stimulus. To further assess whether the CPMs capture arousal dynamics that generalize beyond the waking contexts in which they were trained, we examined their ability to predict stages of sleep associated with different levels of arousal. 

Finally, we ask whether the arousal CPMs recover a classic consequence of arousal for memory, namely that arousing stimuli are better remembered than neutral stimuli [41,45,52–54]. In the two movie-watching datasets that included post-scan free recall of the movie plot, we use the arousal CPMs to decode time-varying affective, autonomic, and wakefulness arousal while viewing the movie. We then test whether CPM-derived arousal estimates during a movie event predicts whether the event is later remembered. Together, these analyses allow us to ask not only the extent to which different varieties of arousal occupy a common connectome-based reference space, but also whether the corresponding connectivity patterns support memory. 

Results 

We combined data from 98 participants drawn from five publicly available fMRI datasets [38,55–58] ( Figure 1A ). Across these datasets, participants contributed resting-state scans (N = 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

49), movie-watching scans (N = 29), or story-listening scans (N = 20). We regressed out white matter, cerebrospinal fluid, and global signal, as well as motion, from the BOLD time courses. For each participant, the fMRI data were parcellated into 268 cortical and subcortical regions of interest (ROIs) defined by the Shen atlas [59]. Dynamic functional connectivity (FC) was then estimated using a tapered sliding window of 30 seconds. Within each window, we computed the Fisher’s z-transformed Pearson correlation between the BOLD time series of every pair of ROIs. 

For each dataset, we then constructed an arousal network by correlating FC strength with a target arousal time course in a cross-validated manner, retaining only functional connections that showed a significant association at p < .05. Connections that were positively or negatively correlated with the target time course were assigned weights of +1 and -1, respectively, and all remaining connections were assigned a weight of 0. We then generated a predicted arousal time course by computing the element-wise product between the arousal network weights and the dynamic FC matrix at each time point of held-out test data ( Figure 1B; see Methods). 

Figure 1. Overview of fMRI datasets and CPM pipeline. (A) The datasets included resting state scans with concurrent measurements of pupil dilation ( Pupil Rest ) and EEG ( EEG Rest ), movie-watching scans (Movies ) and story-listening with pupil dilation collected from a different group of participants listening to the same story ( Pupil Story ). ( B) Dynamic FC matrices were computed using a 30-s tapered sliding window. For each dataset, fluctuations in FC strength were correlated with the corresponding arousal time course to identify a network of connections reliably associated with arousal. We then calculated the element-wise product between this arousal network and held-out test data to generate predicted arousal time courses for each participant. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Dynamic CPMs generalize across pupil and EEG measures of arousal during wakeful rest 

We first asked whether dynamic FC captures fluctuations in pupil dilation, a widely used measure of autonomic arousal [23]. Pupil size has also been found to be correlated with other autonomic measures such as heart rate and skin conductance [21]. Using an fMRI dataset with concurrent pupillometry during wakeful rest ( Pupil Rest ), we derived a pupil-rest CPM with a leave-one-participant-out cross-validation approach. In each fold, we trained a model to predict fluctuations in pupil dilation from dynamic FC and tested it on the held-out participant. Across folds, average prediction accuracy was significantly higher than chance (mean r = 0.294, p <0.001; Figure 2 ), with statistical significance assessed by comparing the average accuracy against a null distribution of 10,000 permutations in which the predicted pupil timecourses were correlated with phased-randomized observed pupil timecourses. 

We next asked whether dynamic FC captures fluctuations in the spectral slope of the aperiodic component of the EEG power spectrum, an established measure of wakefulness arousal that tracks fluctuations in vigilance, transitions between wake and sleep, and changes in anesthesia depth [25,60–62]. Using a different fMRI dataset with concurrent EEG during wakeful rest ( EEG Rest ), we derived an EEG-rest CPM with the same leave-one-participant-out cross-validation procedure to predict fluctuations in EEG spectral slope. Average prediction accuracy was significantly higher than chance (mean r = 0.081, p = 0.009; Figure 2 ). 

Having found that dynamic FC can separately predict both pupil dilation and EEG spectral slope, we next asked whether a CPM trained on one arousal measure in one dataset generalizes to the other. Average prediction accuracy was significantly higher than chance both when training on pupil dilation and testing on EEG spectral slope (mean r = 0.099, p < 0.001) and when training on EEG spectral slope and testing on pupil dilation (mean r = 0.153, p < 0.001; Figure 2 ), indicating that FC patterns capture shared dynamics across pupil and EEG measures of arousal during wakeful rest. 

Dynamic CPMs generalize across subjective affective arousal ratings and pupil dilation during movie-watching and story listening 

Our previous work found that dynamic CPMs trained to predict subjective affective arousal ratings of one movie generalized to other movies [37]. Here, we extend this work to test if CPMs trained to predict subjective ratings of audiovisual movies would generalize to predict pupil dilation during story-listening, and vice versa. We combined two movie-watching datasets where participants watched audio-visual movies while undergoing fMRI ( Movies ). Each movie was segmented into discrete events defined by major shifts in the narrative (Movie 1: 68 events, average duration = 38.4s; Movie 2: 48 events, average duration: 57.5s). As a measure of affective arousal, we relied on subjective behavioral ratings for each event from a separate group of participants. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 2. Dynamic CPMs generalize across pupil dilation and EEG spectral slope during wakeful rest. The y-axis displays model prediction accuracy, as measured by Pearson’s correlation between the model’s predicted time course and the observed arousal time course. Each datapoint within the box plot denotes a participant. The black horizontal lines show the average of the Fisher-z transformed r-values. The gray half-violin plots show the null distributions generated from correlating the predicted arousal timecourses with phase-randomized observed arousal timecourses. Red: Within-dataset prediction, Blue: Across-dataset prediction. *p<.05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001. 

We then identified FCs that were selected as predictive in both movie datasets and that showed the same direction of association across movies. Using this overlap criterion, we constructed a combined movie-CPM whose feature set comprised connections that were consistent across movies and therefore less likely to reflect idiosyncratic stimulus properties. We applied the combined movie-CPM to an independent dataset in which participants listened to a 20-min spoken story while undergoing fMRI ( Pupil Story ). As this dataset did not include pupillometry data, we used pupil recordings from a separate group of participants listening to the same story and averaged pupil responses across participants to derive a normative time course of stimulus-evoked pupil dilation. Pupil fluctuations were previously shown to be correlated between participants in this dataset [41], indicating that the story evoked arousal in a reliable manner across participants. 

The combined movies CPM significantly predicted this normative pupil time course when applied to the fMRI data during story listening (mean r = 0.101, p = 0.006; Figure 3 ). Similarly, a pupil-story CPM trained to predict the story-evoked pupil time course generalized to predict affective arousal ratings in the two movie datasets (mean r = 0.111, p < 0.001; Figure 3 ). Together, these results indicate that FC patterns that track affective arousal during movies 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

generalize to predict autonomic arousal elicited by a story, and that FC patterns tracking story-evoked autonomic arousal generalize to predict affective arousal ratings during movies. 

Figure 3. Dynamic CPMs generalize across subjective ratings and pupil dilation during movie-watching and story listening. The y-axis displays model prediction accuracy, as measured by Pearson’s correlation between the model’s predicted time course and the observed arousal time course. Each datapoint within the box plot denotes a participant. The black horizontal lines show the average of the Fisher-z transformed r-values. The gray half-violin plots show the null distributions generated from correlating the predicted arousal timecourses with phase-randomized observed arousal timecourses. *p<.05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001 

Dynamic CPMs generalize across rest and narratives and across measures 

Do dynamic FC patterns capture a common arousal signal that generalizes across affective, autonomic, and wakefulness measures, and across both stimulus-evoked and spontaneous fluctuations? To address this question, we tested whether CPMs trained on one task context and one measure generalize to the other task contexts and measures. 

We first tested whether CPMs trained to predict arousal fluctuations during wakeful rest generalize to stimulus-evoked arousal during narratives. Both models that were trained on resting-state data generalized to predict subjective ratings during movie-watching (pupil-rest CPM: mean r = 0.110, p < 0.001; EEG-rest CPM mean r = 0.105, p = 0.002; Figure 4A ) and pupil dilation during story-listening (pupil-rest CPM mean r = 0.090, p = 0.012; EEG-rest CPM mean r = 0.078, p = 0.024; Figure 4A ). 

We next tested whether CPMs trained on stimulus-evoked arousal during narratives generalize to spontaneous arousal fluctuations during wakeful rest. Indeed, CPMs trained on subjective ratings during movie-watching and pupil dilation during story-listening generalized to predict pupil 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

dilation (movies CPM: mean r = 0.142, p < 0.001; pupil-story CPM: mean r = 0.155, p < 0.001) and EEG spectral slope (movies CPM: mean r = 0.087, p = 0.003; pupil-story CPM: mean r =0.082, p = 0.006; Figure 4B ). 

To assess whether model predictions depend on the window length used to train and test the model, we reran all cross-dataset predictions using shorter (16-second) and longer (44-second) sliding windows. With a window size of 44 seconds, prediction accuracy when training on EEG Rest and testing on Pupil Story was marginally significant (mean r = 0.075; p = 0.052). All other across-dataset prediction accuracies were significantly above chance (all ps < 0.05; Fig. S1, S2 ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 4. Dynamic CPMs generalize across rest and narratives and across measures. (A) CPMs trained on spontaneous arousal fluctuations during rest significantly predicted subjective ratings during movie-watching and pupil dilation during story listening. (B) CPMs trained on subjective ratings during movie-watching and pupil dilation during story listening significantly predicted spontaneous arousal fluctuations during rest. In each panel, the y-axis displays the prediction accuracy, as measured by Pearson’s correlation between the model’s predicted time course and the observed arousal time course. Each datapoint within the box plot denotes a participant. The black horizontal lines show the average of the Fisher-z transformed r-values. The gray half-violin plots show the null distributions generated from correlating the predicted arousal timecourses with phase-randomized observed arousal timecourses. *p<.05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001 

Dynamic CPMs generalize to graded arousal across sleep stages 

We next asked whether the functional connections shared across arousal varieties extend to the graded fluctuations in arousal that accompany transitions into sleep. To test this, we applied the arousal CPMs to an EEG Sleep dataset where participants underwent simultaneous EEG and fMRI during 15-minute sleep sessions [58]. Each 30-second epoch had been manually scored as Wake, NREM1, NREM2, or NREM3 reflecting progressively deeper sleep and decreasing arousal. All four models significantly predicted sleep stage from dynamic FC (pupil-rest CPM: r

= 0.124, p < 0.001; EEG-rest CPM: r = 0.136, p < 0.001; pupil-story CPM: r = 0.114, p < 0.001; movies CPM: r = 0.130, p < 0.001, Figure 5) 

Figure 5. Dynamic CPMs generalize to graded arousal across sleep stages. Each CPM was then applied to predict manually scored sleep stages in the EEG Slee p dataset. The y-axis displays model prediction accuracy, as measured by Pearson’s correlation between the model’s predicted arousal timecourse and the manually scored sleep stage timecourses. Each datapoint within the box plot denotes a participant. The black horizontal lines show the average of the Fisher-z transformed r-values. The gray 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

half-violin plots show the null distributions generated from correlating the predicted sleep stage time courses with phase-randomized sleep-stage timecourses. *p<.05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001 

Common predictive edges across arousal networks 

Generalization across contexts and measures provides evidence that dynamic FC captures shared arousal dynamics across spontaneous and stimulus-evoked states, as well as across affective, autonomic, and wakefulness measures. However, successful prediction does not, by itself, imply that these varieties of arousal occupy a shared neural reference space, because different models could be relying on distinct sets of functional connections. To test the extent to which cross-context and cross-measure generalization reflects common underlying connectivity patterns, we examined the overlap among the predictive edges (i.e., connections) across models. 

We computed the proportion of two-way, three-way, and four-way overlap among the predictive edges selected in the pupil-rest, EEG-rest, pupil-story, and movie CPMs. Edges were considered overlapping if they correlated with arousal in the same direction across multiple datasets. To determine whether the observed overlaps exceeded what would be expected by chance, we used a permutation procedure where, for each model, we randomly selected the same number of edges that were selected in the corresponding empirical network and recomputed overlap to generate a null distribution of overlap proportions [63]. The proportion of overlapping edges was significant for every possible combination of networks (all p < 0.001; Figure 6 ), indicating that the CPMs drew on partially shared sets of functional connections. Notably, 23 predictive edges were common to all four networks, consistent with the presence of a core set of connectivity features that generalize across contexts and measures ( Figure 7A ). A predictive model restricted to these 23 edges significantly predicted arousal fluctuations across all datasets ( Figure S3 ). 

All 23 common predictive edges were positive and connected 31 unique nodes distributed across multiple canonical functional networks ( Figures 7B, 7C, Table S1 ). The left dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC), a node in the salience network, contributed the greatest number of edges overall ( n = 4), which connected the dACC to the right premotor cortex, right primary somatosensory cortex, left primary motor cortex, and left primary somatosensory cortex ( Figure S4 ). Eight of the significant edges were between the salience and somatomotor networks, constituting the largest share of network connections. To assess whether this concentration of edges within particular network pairs exceeded what would be expected given the number of nodes in each network, we compared the proportion of edges within and between networks to a null distribution generated by shuffling the edges while preserving the number of significant ROIs. The proportion of edges between the salience and somatomotor networks was indeed higher than expected by chance ( p < 0.001). This was also true of the somatomotor network and cerebellum ( p = 0.015), and between the dorsal attention network and cerebellum ( p = 0.025). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 6. Number of unique and overlapping FCs among arousal networks. Features were considered overlapping if they were significantly correlated with arousal in the same direction between networks. * indicates a significant proportion of overlap at p < 0.001. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint Figure 7. Visualizing overlapping features across arousal networks. (A) Glass brain displaying 23 functional connections that overlap across all four CPMs. Nodes indicate brain regions, with colors denoting functional networks. (B) Number of features with contributing edges by functional networks. 

(C) Proportion of edges within and between each pair of functional networks that are in the set of common predictive edges. CON: Control, DAN: Dorsal Attention, DMN: Default Mode, SAL: Salience, SM: Somatomotor, VIS: Visual, CB: Cerebellum. * p < 0.05, *** p < 0.001. 

Decoded arousal during movie-watching predicts subsequent recall fidelity 

Having established that the arousal CPMs generalize across measures and contexts, we next asked whether the decoded arousal dynamics were behaviorally meaningful. We had selected these two movie-watching datasets because they included post-scan free recall, in which participants verbally recounted what they remembered about the movie. This allowed us to test whether CPM-decoded arousal during movie-viewing reproduces well-established arousal-related memory enhancement effects. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We used Google’s Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) [64] to convert detailed annotations of each movie event and participants’ recall transcripts into numerical vectors that reflect the semantic meaning of the text. Following previous work [41,65,66], we quantified recall fidelity as the cosine similarity between each event’s annotation vector and the vector of a participant’s recall of the corresponding event. We then used Bayesian multi-level models to predict the recall fidelity of an event from decoded arousal while viewing the event, as decoded by each CPM. 

For each CPM, higher decoded arousal while viewing a movie event was associated with higher subsequent recall fidelity (pupil-rest CPM: b = 0.078, p(b > 0) = 0.999, 95% HDI [0.023, 0.129], WAIC = 4590; EEG-rest CPM: b = 0.081, p(b > 0) = 0.999, 95% HDI [0.029, 0.131], WAIC = 4590; pupil-story CPM: b = 0.076, p(b > 0) = 0.999, 95% HDI [0.023, 0.126], WAIC = 4593; movies CPM: b = 0.072, p(b > 0) = 0.997, 95% HDI [0.021, 0.124], WAIC = 4593; WAIC null =4601; Figure 8 ). These results indicate that the arousal dynamics decoded from dynamic FC during naturalistic viewing predict subsequent memory, and are consistent with proposals that arousal-dependent network states support enhanced memory encoding. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Figure 8. Predicting subsequent memory from decoded arousal during movie-watching. (A) Movie annotations and participants’ recall transcript were converted into sentence embeddings. Recall fidelity was computed as the cosine similarity between the sentence embeddings of a recalled event and the matching movie annotation. For each event, we obtained four separate measures of decoded arousal by applying the movie, pupil-rest, pupil-story, and EEG-rest CPMs to the movie-watching fMRI data. Movie CPMs were trained on one movie and applied to the second movie. Each decoded arousal measure was used to predict recall fidelity of the matching event using a Bayesian multilevel model. (B) Posterior distributions of the effect of each decoded arousal measure on recall fidelity. Thick solid line indicates 95% highest density interval. 

Discussion 

Across wakeful rest, movie-watching, and story-listening, fluctuations in affective, autonomic, and wakeful arousal were reliably decoded from patterns of dynamic connectivity, with predictive models trained on one measure and task context generalizing to the others. Importantly, model predictions were supported by partially overlapping predictive connections, including a small set of edges shared across all models, consistent with a shared connectome-based neural reference space that spans multiple varieties of arousal, and extends to the graded fluctuations in arousal during different sleep stages. Furthermore, CPM-decoded arousal dynamics during naturalistic movie-viewing predicted subsequent memory. Altogether, these findings suggest that diverse operationalizations of arousal converge on a partially shared set of network interactions that generalize across contexts and support memory encoding. 

A strength of the current approach is that it demonstrates generalization across both spontaneous fluctuations in arousal during wakeful rest and arousal elicited by external narratives. Stimulus features often covary with experienced arousal [67–69], raising the possibility that decoders trained on movies or stories track properties of the stimulus rather than arousal. Consistent with this concern, human arousal ratings can be predicted from stimulus features extracted by computer vision models that do not have bodily states or subjective experience [70], indicating that stimulus structure alone can account for variance in normative arousal judgments. At the same time, arousal decoded during rest and sleep is also susceptible to alternative explanations, including head motion, scanner drift, or respiration-related coupling between physiological signals and the BOLD response [71–73]. Generalization across stimulus-viewing, rest, and sleep therefore provides greater confidence that the decoded signal reflects common arousal-related network dynamics, rather than stimulus-related confounds or non-neuronal contributions. 

While we demonstrate generalization and overlapping predictive features across measures of affective, autonomic, and wakefulness arousal, our findings do not imply that different varieties of arousal are neurally identical or reducible to a single unitary process. Indeed, a recent study by Zhang and colleagues [34] derived an activation-based multivariate signature of affective arousal and found that the resulting pattern did not generalize to predict autonomic activation or states of 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

wakefulness. One way to reconcile these findings is to distinguish between activity patterns that discriminate between varieties of arousal and network-level processes that coordinate global state changes across the brain that may be shared. Dynamic FC, which captures interactions between brain regions, would be more sensitive to the latter. Here, our results suggest that the inter-regional interactions that support distinct varieties of arousal are partially overlapping and track shared dynamics. 

Our findings complement two recent studies investigating the relationship between dynamic FC, arousal, and memory. Huang and colleagues [45] used a similar dynamic CPM approach to identify separate connectivity networks that predict arousal ratings of images and subsequent memory of those images, finding that pharmacologically inducing arousal by administering cortisol increased the overlap between the functional connections predictive of arousal and those predictive of memory. In a second study [41], our research group applied graph theoretic analyses to the same movie-watching and story-listening datasets used in the current study, showing that high-arousal moments are associated with increased brain-wide integration across functional brain networks, which in turn predicted better subsequent memory for those moments. Both studies converge on the conclusion that arousal coordinates the reconfiguration of large-scale functional networks to support memory encoding. 

The current set of findings builds on this past work in two ways. First, we show that the connectivity patterns associated with spontaneous fluctuations in autonomic and wakeful arousal during rest also predict which moments are later remembered, suggesting a domain-general arousal neural signature that supports arousal-dependent enhancement of emotional memories. This domain-general signature aligns with a recent proposal that arousal provides alow-dimensional organizing axis for brain-wide dynamics shared across diverse behavioral and physiological measures [44]. Second, by modeling affective, autonomic, and wakeful arousal within the same CPM framework, we identify the set of functional edges that are consistently predictive of arousal and memory across measures and contexts. 

Of the 23 functional edges shared across models, the largest proportion were edges between the somatomotor and salience networks. Much of the arousal literature has focused on regions in the salience network [40,74–77], and the prominence of the somatomotor network was initially surprising to us. One interpretation is that a consistent consequence of arousal, regardless of how it is operationalized, is a shift toward heightened sensitivity to the external environment [78] and greater action readiness [79]. In this view, the salience network detects behaviorally relevant events, while somatomotor systems prepare the organism to respond. The stronger coupling between these networks during heightened arousal may thus reflect tighter coordination between perceptual, evaluative, and motor systems. Consistent with this view, half of the salience-somatomotor edges in the shared set involved the dACC, a region often implicated in arousal-dependent adjustments of attention and behavior [80–83]. Our results show these edges 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

are also predictive of arousal during rest, suggesting an intrinsic coupling between salience detection and action readiness that persists without external stimulation. The set of common edges also contained significantly more edges than expected by chance between the cerebellum and both the dorsal attention and somatomotor networks, consistent with previous work highlighting the involvement of the cerebellum in arousal-related dynamics [84,85]. 

While the CPMs generalize robustly across datasets, task contexts and measures, the cross-dataset prediction accuracies were modest, with correlation values ranging from 0.08 to 0.16. These values are bounded by the reliability of both the arousal measures and fMRI. Notably, cross-dataset prediction accuracy was approximately half that of within-dataset prediction in the Pupil-Rest data and comparable to within-dataset prediction in the EEG Rest 

data, suggesting that generalizing across measures and contexts incurred only a moderate cost relative to predicting within a single measure and context. The accuracies we observed are also comparable to those reported in prior work using dynamic CPMs to predict fluctuations in psychological states across datasets, which have reported r-values of 0.1-0.2 [37,48,49,51]. Moreover, the decoded arousal time courses predicted subsequent recall fidelity for movie events, indicating that the shared signal tracks variance that is behaviorally relevant. 

One limitation of the current study is that we used pupil dilation as our only physiological measure, whereas autonomic arousal has also been indexed using heart rate, respiration, and skin conductance. A recent study [20] demonstrated that these physiological measures fluctuate together, raising the possibility that the autonomic CPM derived from pupil dilation would generalize to predict these other measures. Nevertheless, this remains an empirical question, and future studies with concurrent acquisition of multiple physiological signals will be needed to test whether different autonomic measures converge on the same predictive edges. The same study also found that some physiological measures covary with the fMRI BOLD global signal. As one of the goals of our study was to identify the specific pattern of functional connections that predict arousal, we regressed out global signal during preprocessing. Thus, the present findings are unlikely to be driven by overall increase or decrease in the global signal, and instead more likely reflect changes in inter-regional coupling that track arousal dynamics. 

In sum, we provide a connectome-based account of how multiple operationalizations of arousal relate to one another in the brain. Applying dynamic CPMs across wakeful rest and naturalistic narratives, we show that affective, autonomic, and wakefulness arousal can be reliably decoded from time-varying functional connectivity, that these decoders generalize across measures and contexts, and that their predictions are supported by partially overlapping sets of functional connections. These results are consistent with a connectome-based neural reference space for arousal, in which different varieties share a core set of predictive connections. More broadly, this framework offers a path toward moving beyond debates about whether arousal is “unitary” or “heterogeneous” by providing quantitative tools to map how arousal varieties converge 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

depending on task demands, stimulus modality, and individual differences. Extending this approach to clinical populations and pharmacological manipulations may help identify conditions under which arousal-related network states become amplified or suppressed [86,87], sharpening mechanistic accounts of arousal and its consequences for cognition. 

Materials and Methods 

fMRI Datasets 

Five fMRI datasets from OpenNeuro were analyzed in this study. Across all datasets, participants with either more than 3 mm of translation or more than 3 degrees of rotation for any fMRI run were excluded from the analyses. Data collection procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the respective institutions. Data analysis was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Chicago. 

Pupil Rest . The Lee et al. (2022) Yale Resting-State Pupillometry/fMRI dataset [38] includes two runs of simultaneous fMRI and pupil dilation data collected during wakeful rest from 27 participants (16 female, 11 male; mean age = 26.5 years). Following the original authors, we discarded the first 10s of each run, yielding 13 min 20 s of usable data (TR=1s, TE=30ms, flip angle=55°, voxel size=2x2x2mm 3). Two participants were excluded based on our motion exclusion criteria, yielding a final sample of 25 participants. 

EEG Rest. The Gu et al. (2023) simultaneous EEG-fMRI dataset [58] includes two resting-state runs with concurrent EEG recordings collected during wakeful rest, yielding 20 min of usable fMRI data (TR=2.1s, TE=25ms, flip angle=90°, voxel size=3x3x4mm 3) from 33 participants (16 female, 17 male; mean age = 22.1 years). Seven participants were excluded due to clock synchronization and BESA-related file errors in the EEG data, and two additional participants were excluded based on our motion criteria. This resulted in a final sample of 24 participants. 

Pupil Story. The Finn et al. (2018) Paranoia dataset [57] includes fMRI data acquired while 22 participants (11 female, 11 male; mean age = 27.0 years) listened to a ~20-min audio story (TR=1s, TE=30ms, flip angle=8°, voxel size=2x2x2mm 3), presented across three fMRI runs. Based on our motion exclusion criteria, we included 20 participants. As the original Paranoia 

dataset did not include pupil recordings, we used a behavioral dataset collected by Park et al. (2025) [41], where an independent sample of 35 participants listened to the same audio story while their pupil size was recorded. Following the original authors, we excluded three participants due to equipment failure and five participants for noisy pupil data (i.e., more than a quarter of the data points deviated from the median pupil size by 2 standard deviations). 

Movies. Movie-watching data were drawn from two publicly available datasets: the Chen et al. (2017) Sherlock dataset (TR=1.5s, TE=28ms, flip angle=64°, voxel size=3x3x4mm 3) [55], in which 17 participants (7 female, 10 male; mean age = 20.8 years) watched one 50-min TV 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

episode, and the Lee et al. (2022) Film Festival dataset (TR=1.5s, TE=39ms, flip angle=50°, voxel size=2x2x2mm3) [56], in which 21 participants (12 female, 9 male; mean age = 26.6 years) watched 10 short films with a collective duration of 50-minutes. Following the original authors, the cartoon introduction at the beginning of each run was discarded. The time courses were shifted by 4.5 s to account for hemodynamic lag. In Sherlock , one participant was excluded due to missing data, one due to preprocessing errors, and one due to our motion criteria. In Film Festival , we excluded three participants according to our motion criteria and three additional participants that were excluded by the original authors. In total, we included 29 of 38 participants across the two datasets. 

We obtained event segmentations of Sherlock and Film Festival from [55] and [41] respectively, where the movie was divided into events defined by major shifts in the narrative, including changes in topic, location, time, and characters ( Sherlock: 48 events, average length = 57.5s, SD = 41.8s; Film Festival : 68 events, average length = 38.4s, SD = 18.2s). We used behavioral arousal ratings collected in [41], where a separate group of 30 participants rated the arousal of each event from a scale of 1 to 5. The ratings were z-scored within each participant, and averaged across the group to obtain the arousal rating for each event. 

MRI preprocessing 

MRI data were processed using fMRIPrep [88]. For anatomical data, the T1w image was corrected for intensity non-uniformity and skull-stripped. Brain tissue segmentation of cerebrospinal fluid, white-matter, and gray-matter was performed on the resulting image. Volume-based spatial normalization was performed to the standard space MNI152Lin6Asym throughout registration. For functional data, we performed head motion correction before co-registering the functional data to the anatomical image with six degrees of freedom. Cerebrospinal fluid, white matter, and global signal, as well as head translation and rotation were extracted at each timepoint in the BOLD signal. We then used nilearn’s clean_img function to apply a high-pass filter to each functional time course [89]. We excluded any time courses with excessive motion parameters (motion > 3.0 mm or rotation > 3.0 degrees). Finally, we regressed out cerebrospinal fluid, white matter, and global signal from the filtered functional data. 

EEG preprocessing and spectral slope calculation 

Brain Electrical Source Analysis software (BESA Research 7.1) was used to preprocess EEG recordings. We first removed fMRI artifacts from the EEG signal using BESA’s built in functionality. Next, recordings were filtered using a 0.3 Hz high pass filter, 80 Hz low pass filter, and a 60 Hz notch filter to remove electrical noise. Voltages were then referenced to the average of all electrodes. Using tags corresponding to each fMRI TR, epochs were defined starting at 100 msec prior to TR and ending 2000 msec after TR. Voltage threshold detection was used for ocular artifact detection (voltage thresholds for the EOG electrodes were set at 150 μV for horizontal eye movements and 250 μV for vertical eye movements). Epochs were then 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

additionally visually inspected by an expert for ocular artifacts including eye blinks and eye movements that were missed by the threshold detection. Identified artifacts were then removed from the epochs using ocular source components via BESA [90,91]. Certain artifacts, including sweat and myogenic artifacts (i.e., jaw clenching), could not be removed from the epochs using independent component analysis. Trials contaminated with these artifacts were not included in further analysis. Individual channels with excessive noise (greater than 150 μV), low signal (less than 0.01 μV), or excessive change (difference of 75 μV or more between adjacent channels) were replaced via interpolation using surrounding channels. 

Spectral slopes were then calculated on the remaining epochs that did not have excessive noise. First, a power spectral density estimate was calculated using Welch’s method using scipy (https://docs.scipy.org). Next, the power spectral density estimate was filtered from 0.5 Hz to 80 Hz, which was then log transformed (using base 10). Finally, the slope of a fitted line to the log transformed spectral density plot was calculated as the point estimate for arousal during a specific epoch. This procedure was repeated for each epoch, enabling a time course of EEG spectral slopes. 

Pupillometry preprocessing 

For the Pupil-Rest pupil data, we used the preprocessed data provided by the authors [58], where the pupil time courses were blink-corrected, low-pass filtered, and downsampled to match the fMRI TR. For the Pupil Story pupil data, we followed the preprocessing procedures described in [41] where pupil time courses were similarly blink-corrected, interpolated, and downsampled. Each pupil time course was then z-scored within each run. The time courses were then averaged across participants to capture stimulus-evoked pupil fluctuations. 

Dynamic connectome-based predictive modeling 

Whole-brain fMRI data were parcellated into 268 cortical and subcortical ROI using the Shen Atlas [59]. For each ROI, we averaged the BOLD signal across voxels to obtain a single time course. For the resting-state and story-listening datasets, dynamic FC was computed using a tapered sliding window approach. Within each window, we calculated the Fisher z-transformed Pearson’s correlation between the time courses of every pair of ROIs (window size: Pupil Rest :30 TRs = 30s, EEG Rest : 14 TRs = 29.4s, Pupil Story : 30 TRs = 30s; Step size: 1TR, Gaussian kernel σ = 3TR). The EEG spectral slope and pupil dilation time courses were convolved with a hemodynamic response function and smoothed over the same gaussian sliding window to match the fMRI data. For the movie datasets, we estimated FC within each narrative event to align with the event-level behavioral arousal ratings. 

Within-dataset prediction. We trained dynamic CPMs using leave-one-participant-out cross-validation. In each fold, one participant served as the test set and the remaining N - 1 

participants served as the training set. Feature selection was performed in the training set by 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

correlating FC strength with the target arousal time course and retaining FCs that were positively or negatively correlated (one-tailed t-tests, p < 0.05). Significant positive and negative connections were assigned weights of +1 and -1, respectively, and all other connections were set to 0, yielding a binarized, signed arousal network for that fold. At each time point, we computed the element-wise product between the arousal network weights and the held-out participant’s dynamic FC matrix to obtain the predicted arousal time course. 

Prediction accuracy was quantified as the Pearson correlation between the predicted and observed arousal time courses for the held-out participant. Correlation coefficients from all folds were Fisher z-transformed, averaged, and converted back to r values for reporting. Statistical significance was assessed using a non-parametric permutation test where the observed r was compared against a null distribution generated by repeating the analyses 10,000 times while phase-randomizing the target arousal time course and recomputing its correlation with the CPM-predicted time course, where p = (1 + # of null r ≥ observed r)/(1 + # of permutations). 

Across-dataset prediction. To test generalization across datasets, we used the same dynamic CPM procedure described above, except that models were trained on all participants in one dataset to derive a single binarized, signed arousal network, and applied to each participant in an independent test dataset. Prediction accuracy was quantified as the Pearson correlation between predicted and target arousal time courses, with statistical significance assessed using the same phase-randomization permutation procedure described above. 

Analyses with the movie and story datasets always used this across-dataset approach, with models trained on all participants viewing or listening to one narrative, and tested on all participants in a dataset where participants viewed or listened to another narrative. When testing generalization from movie datasets to the other datasets, we relied on a combined movie-CPM where we selected only edges that were predictive for both movies and showed the same direction of association across movies. 

Predicting sleep stages from arousal CPMs 

The Gu et al. (2023) simultaneous EEG-fMRI dataset [58] also includes data from several (1-8) 15-min sleep sessions for each participant. The full sample included 33 participants, but we restricted our analyses to the same 24 participants used in the main analyses. EEG data were preprocessed to remove gradient and ballistocardiogram artifacts, re-referenced to the contralateral mastoid, and bandpass filtered at 0.3-35 Hz. A Registered Polysomnographic Technologist then scored each 30-second epoch as Wake, NREM1, NREM2, or NREM3 following AASM guidelines [92]. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To generate a continuous target time course, we assigned ordinal values to each stage (Wake: 4, NREM1: 3, NREM2: 2, NREM3: 1), reflecting progressively deeper sleep and decreasing arousal. Dynamic FC was estimated within each 30-second epoch of the fMRI data to align with the temporal resolution of the sleep staging. We then applied each of the four arousal CPMs to predict the ordinal wakefulness time course. Prediction accuracy and statistical significance were assessed using the same across-dataset procedure. Scans with only one sleep stage throughout were excluded from the analysis. 

Network Overlap 

We quantified the extent to which predictive connections were shared across the pupil-rest, EEG-rest, pupil-story, and combined-movies CPMs by computing all two-way, three-way, and four-way overlap proportions. An edge was counted as overlapping only if it was selected as predictive in each CPM under consideration and showed the same direction of association with arousal (positive or negative). We assessed whether the observed overlap proportions exceeded chance using permutation testing. For each CPM, we randomly sampled the same number of edges as in the corresponding empirical CPM, recomputed the overlap proportion for the relevant CPM combination, and repeated this procedure 10,000 times to generate a null distribution for each overlap statistic. P-values were computed as (1 + # of null proportions ≥ observed proportion)/(1 + # of permutations) [63]. 

We identified the subset of ROIs and edges comprising the four-way overlap set and summarized their distribution across large-scale functional networks. Since the Shen atlas ROIs do not map directly onto commonly used canonical functional network labels, we identified the Schaefer parcel with the greatest spatial overlap and assigned the Shen ROI the corresponding Yeo 7-network label associated with that Schaefer parcel [93]. This mapping facilitates comparison with prior work that uses Yeo network labels. ROIs in the cerebellum were assigned to a “Cerebellum” network. 

To test whether the proportion of edges within or between specific network pairs exceeded what would be expected by chance, we compared the observed proportion against a null distribution. In each of 10,000 iterations, we randomly selected the same number of ROIs from the full Shen atlas as in the empirical four-way overlap set and randomly generated edges among those ROIs, matching the number of edges in the observed set. We computed the proportion of edges within and between network pairs in each iteration, and p-values were computed as (1 + # of null proportions ≥ observed proportion)/(1 + # of permutations). 

Predicting memory from decoded arousal 

Recall transcripts were obtained from the free recall task in the movie-watching datasets, in which participants verbally recounted the movie plot immediately after scanning. The segmentation and matching of recall transcripts to movie events were obtained from [55] for 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Sherlock and [41] for Film Festival . We embedded both event annotations and recall transcripts using Google’s Universal Sentence Encoder (USE) to obtain 512-dimensional vectors. USE embeds sentences with similar meaning in vectors closer in space [64]. Following prior work [41,48,65,94], we calculated “recall fidelity” as the cosine similarity between each event’s annotation vector and the participant’s recall vector for the corresponding event 

We tested whether CPM-decoded arousal during each event predicted later recall fidelity using Bayesian multilevel models implemented in brms [95]. For each CPM, decoded arousal was obtained at the event level by applying the corresponding arousal network to the movie functional connectivity data. This included CPMs trained on Pupil Rest , EEG Rest , and Pupil Story , as well as cross-movie prediction within the Movies datasets. Each model predicted recall fidelity from decoded arousal and included participant-level random intercepts. 

We assumed weakly informative priors (see Supplemental Text). Models were fitted with four MCMC chains of 4,000 iterations each, discarding the first 1,000 iterations per chain as warm-up. Convergence was assessed using the Gelman–Rubin statistic (R̂). We report posterior means and 95% highest density intervals (HDIs). Effects were considered credibly above zero when more than 95% of the posterior mass exceeded zero. Model fit was compared using the Widely Applicable Information Criterion (WAIC), with lower values indicating better out-of-sample predictive performance. 

Brain Visualization 

Brain visualizations were created using BrainNetViewer [96]. 

Data Availability 

All fMRI datasets used in this paper are publicly available on OpenNeuro. Arousal ratings for 

Sherlock and Film Festival as well as pupil dilation data for Pupil Story are available at 

https://github.com/kannonb7/GeneralizedArousal .

Code Availability 

Analysis scripts are available at  https://github.com/kannonb7/GeneralizedArousal .

Acknowledgments 

We thank all the authors who shared their data publicly and made this research possible. We acknowledge the University of Chicago’s Research Computing Center and the University of Chicago Social Sciences Division for their support of this work. 

Competing Interests Statement 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

References 

1.  Sara SJ, Bouret S. Orienting and Reorienting: The Locus Coeruleus Mediates Cognition through Arousal. Neuron. 2012;76: 130–141. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2012.09.011 

2.  Unsworth N, Robison MK. The importance of arousal for variation in working memory capacity and attention control: A latent variable pupillometry study. J Exp Psychol Learn Mem Cogn. 2017;43: 1962–1987. doi:10.1037/xlm0000421 

3.  Mather M, Sutherland MR. Arousal-Biased Competition in Perception and Memory. Perspect Psychol Sci. 2011;6: 114–133. doi:10.1177/1745691611400234 

4.  Gee JW de, Mridha Z, Hudson M, Shi Y, Ramsaywak H, Smith S, et al. Strategic stabilization of arousal boosts sustained attention. Curr Biol. 2024;34: 4114-4128.e6. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2024.07.070 

5.  Russell JA. Core affect and the psychological construction of emotion. Psychol Rev. 2003;110: 145–172. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.110.1.145 

6.  Barrett LF. Discrete Emotions or Dimensions? The Role of Valence Focus and Arousal Focus. Cogn Emot. 1998;12: 579–599. doi:10.1080/026999398379574 

7.  Nassar MR. Toward a computational role for locus coeruleus/norepinephrine arousal systems. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2024;59: 101407. doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2024.101407 

8.  Rouhani N, Niv Y, Frank MJ, Schwabe L. Multiple routes to enhanced memory for emotionally relevant events. Trends Cogn Sci. 2023;27: 867–882. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2023.06.006 

9.  McGaugh JL. Emotional arousal regulation of memory consolidation. Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2018;19: 55–60. doi:10.1016/j.cobeha.2017.10.003 

10.  Dunsmoor JE, Murty VP, Clewett D, Phelps EA, Davachi L. Tag and capture: how salient experiences target and rescue nearby events in memory. Trends Cogn Sci. 2022;26: 782–795. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2022.06.009 

11.  LaBar KS, Phelps EA. Arousal-Mediated Memory Consolidation: Role of the Medial Temporal Lobe in Humans. Psychol Sci. 1998;9: 490–493. doi:10.1111/1467-9280.00090 

12.  Mather M, Clewett D, Sakaki M, Harley CW. Norepinephrine ignites local hotspots of neuronal excitation: How arousal amplifies selectivity in perception and memory. Behav Brain Sci. 2016;39: e200. doi:10.1017/S0140525X15000667 

13.  Aston-Jones G, Cohen JD. An integrative theory of locus coeruleus-norepinephrine function: adaptive gain and optimal performance. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2005;28: 403–450. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.28.061604.135709 

14.  Leong YC, Dziembaj R, D’Esposito M. Pupil-Linked Arousal Biases Evidence Accumulation Toward Desirable Percepts During Perceptual Decision-Making. Psychol Sci. 2021;32: 1494–1509. doi:10.1177/09567976211004547 

15.  Knutson B, Greer SM. Anticipatory affect: neural correlates and consequences for choice. Philos Trans R Soc B Biol Sci. 2008; 363: 3771–3786. doi:10.1098/rstb.2008.0155 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

16.  de Gee JW, Colizoli O, Kloosterman NA, Knapen T, Nieuwenhuis S, Donner TH. Dynamic modulation of decision biases by brainstem arousal systems. Stephan KE, editor. eLife. 2017;6: e23232. doi:10.7554/eLife.23232 

17.  Satpute AB, Kragel PA, Barrett LF, Wager TD, Bianciardi M. Deconstructing arousal into wakeful, autonomic and affective varieties. Neurosci Lett. 2019;693: 19–28. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2018.01.042 

18.  Kuppens P, Tuerlinckx F, Russell JA, Barrett LF. The relation between valence and arousal in subjective experience. Psychol Bull. 2013;139: 917–940. doi:10.1037/a0030811 

19.  Thayer RE. Measurement of Activation through Self-Report. Psychol Rep. 1967;20: 663–678. doi:10.2466/pr0.1967.20.2.663 

20.  Bolt T, Wang S, Nomi JS, Setton R, Gold BP, deB. Frederick B, et al. Autonomic physiological coupling of the global fMRI signal. Nat Neurosci. 2025;28: 1327–1335. doi:10.1038/s41593-025-01945-y 

21.  Chang Y-H, Yep R, Wang C-A. Pupil size correlates with heart rate, skin conductance, pulse wave amplitude, and respiration responses during emotional conflict and valence processing. Psychophysiology. 2025;62: e14726. doi:10.1111/psyp.14726 

22.  Critchley HD. Neural mechanisms of autonomic, affective, and cognitive integration. J Comp Neurol. 2005;493: 154–166. doi:10.1002/cne.20749 

23.  Bradley MM, Miccoli L, Escrig MA, Lang PJ. The pupil as a measure of emotional arousal and autonomic activation. Psychophysiology. 2008;45: 602–607. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.2008.00654.x 

24.  Lewis LD, Voigts J, Flores FJ, Schmitt LI, Wilson MA, Halassa MM, et al. Thalamic reticular nucleus induces fast and local modulation of arousal state. Frank MJ, editor. eLife. 2015;4: e08760. doi:10.7554/eLife.08760 

25.  Lendner JD, Helfrich RF, Mander BA, Romundstad L, Lin JJ, Walker MP, et al. An electrophysiological marker of arousal level in humans. Haegens S, Colgin LL, Piantoni G, editors. eLife. 2020;9: e55092. doi:10.7554/eLife.55092 

26.  Setzer B, Fultz NE, Gomez DEP, Williams SD, Bonmassar G, Polimeni JR, et al. A temporal sequence of thalamic activity unfolds at transitions in behavioral arousal state. Nat Commun. 2022;13: 5442. doi:10.1038/s41467-022-33010-8 

27.  Smith KE, Woodard K, Pollak SD. Arousal May Not Be Anything to Get Excited About. Emot Rev. 2025;17: 3–15. doi:10.1177/17540739241303499 

28.  Sander D. Is “Arousal,” as a Scientific Concept, Worse than Useless? Emot Rev. 2025;17: 19–22. doi:10.1177/17540739241303501 

29.  Colombetti G, Kuppens P. How Should We Understand Valence, Arousal, and Their Relation? Emotion Theory: The Routledge Comprehensive Guide. Routledge; 2024. 

30.  Reid T, Nielson C, Wormwood JB. Measuring Arousal: Promises and Pitfalls. Affect Sci. 2025;6: 369–379. doi:10.1007/s42761-024-00288-4 

31.  Edelman GM. The remembered present:  A biological theory of consciousness. New York, NY, US: Basic Books; 1989. pp. xx, 346. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

32.  Lindquist KA, Wager TD, Kober H, Bliss-Moreau E, Barrett LF. The brain basis of emotion: a meta-analytic review. Behav Brain Sci. 2012;35: 121–143. doi:10.1017/S0140525X11000446 

33.  Sabat M, de Dampierre C, Tallon-Baudry C. Evidence for domain-general arousal from semantic and neuroimaging meta-analyses reconciles opposing views on arousal. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2025;122: e2413808122. doi:10.1073/pnas.2413808122 

34.  Zhang R, Gan X, Xu T, Yu F, Wang L, Song X, et al. A neurofunctional signature of affective arousal generalizes across valence domains and distinguishes subjective experience from autonomic reactivity. Nat Commun. 2025;16: 6492. doi:10.1038/s41467-025-61706-0 

35.  Lee SA, Lee J-J, Han J, Choi M, Wager TD, Woo C-W. Brain representations of affective valence and intensity in sustained pleasure and pain. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2024;121: e2310433121. doi:10.1073/pnas.2310433121 

36.  Kinnison J, Padmala S, Choi J-M, Pessoa L. Network Analysis Reveals Increased Integration during Emotional and Motivational Processing. J Neurosci. 2012;32: 8361–8372. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0821-12.2012 

37.  Ke J, Song H, Bai Z, Rosenberg MD, Leong YC. Dynamic brain connectivity predicts emotional arousal during naturalistic movie-watching. PLOS Comput Biol. 2025;21: e1012994. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1012994 

38.  Lee K, Horien C, O’Connor D, Garand-Sheridan B, Tokoglu F, Scheinost D, et al. Arousal impacts distributed hubs modulating the integration of brain functional connectivity. NeuroImage. 2022;258: 119364. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119364 

39.  Chang C, Metzger CD, Glover GH, Duyn JH, Heinze H-J, Walter M. Association between heart rate variability and fluctuations in resting-state functional connectivity. NeuroImage. 2013;68: 93–104. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.11.038 

40.  Young CB, Raz G, Everaerd D, Beckmann CF, Tendolkar I, Hendler T, et al. Dynamic Shifts in Large-Scale Brain Network Balance As a Function of Arousal. J Neurosci. 2017;37: 281–290. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1759-16.2016 

41.  Park JS, Gollapudi K, Ke J, Nau M, Pappas I, Leong YC. Emotional arousal enhances narrative memories through functional integration of large-scale brain networks. Nat Hum Behav. 2025; 1–20. doi:10.1038/s41562-025-02315-1 

42.  Raut RV, Snyder AZ, Mitra A, Yellin D, Fujii N, Malach R, et al. Global waves synchronize the brain’s functional systems with fluctuating arousal. Sci Adv. 2021;7: eabf2709. doi:10.1126/sciadv.abf2709 

43.  Shine JM, Bissett PG, Bell PT, Koyejo O, Balsters JH, Gorgolewski KJ, et al. The Dynamics of Functional Brain Networks: Integrated Network States during Cognitive Task Performance. Neuron. 2016;92: 544–554. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2016.09.018 

44.  Raut RV, Rosenthal ZP, Wang X, Miao H, Zhang Z, Lee J-M, et al. Arousal as a universal embedding for spatiotemporal brain dynamics. Nature. 2025; 1–8. doi:10.1038/s41586-025-09544-4 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

45.  Huang Y, O’Connor D, Harris BB, Sinha R, Constable RT, Goldfarb EV. Dynamic brain mechanisms supporting salient memories under cortisol. Sci Adv. 2025;11: eadz4143. doi:10.1126/sciadv.adz4143 

46.  Rosenberg MD, Finn ES, Scheinost D, Papademetris X, Shen X, Constable RT, et al. A neuromarker of sustained attention from whole-brain functional connectivity. Nat Neurosci. 2016;19: 165–171. doi:10.1038/nn.4179 

47.  Shen X, Finn ES, Scheinost D, Rosenberg MD, Chun MM, Papademetris X, et al. Using connectome-based predictive modeling to predict individual behavior from brain connectivity. Nat Protoc. 2017;12: 506–518. doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.178 

48.  Song H, Finn ES, Rosenberg MD. Neural signatures of attentional engagement during narratives and its consequences for event memory. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2021;118: e2021905118. doi:10.1073/pnas.2021905118 

49.  Zhang Z, Rosenberg MD. Brain network dynamics predict moments of surprise across contexts. Nat Hum Behav. 2025;9: 554–568. doi:10.1038/s41562-024-02017-0 

50.  Ke J, Chamberlain TA, Song H, Corriveau A, Zhang Z, Martinez T, et al. Ongoing thoughts at rest reflect functional brain organization and behavior. bioRxiv; 2025. p. 2025.08.18.670664. doi:10.1101/2025.08.18.670664 

51.  Corriveau A, Ke J, Rosenberg MD. Common Brain Network Dynamics Capture Attention Fluctuations in Tasks and Movies. J Cogn Neurosci. 2026; 1–13. doi:10.1162/JOCN.a.2622 

52.  McGaugh JL. Memory and Emotion: The Making of Lasting Memories. Columbia University Press; 2003. 

53.  Heuer F, Reisberg D. Vivid memories of emotional events: The accuracy of remembered minutiae. Mem Cognit. 1990;18: 496–506. doi:10.3758/BF03198482 

54.  LaBar KS, Cabeza R. Cognitive neuroscience of emotional memory. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2006;7: 54–64. doi:10.1038/nrn1825 

55.  Chen J, Leong YC, Honey CJ, Yong CH, Norman KA, Hasson U. Shared memories reveal shared structure in neural activity across individuals. Nat Neurosci. 2017;20: 115–125. doi:10.1038/nn.4450 

56.  Lee H, Chen J. Predicting memory from the network structure of naturalistic events. Nat Commun. 2022;13: 4235. doi:10.1038/s41467-022-31965-2 

57.  Finn ES, Corlett PR, Chen G, Bandettini PA, Constable RT. Trait paranoia shapes inter-subject synchrony in brain activity during an ambiguous social narrative. Nat Commun. 2018;9: 2043. doi:10.1038/s41467-018-04387-2 

58.  Gu Y, Sainburg LE, Han F, Liu X. Simultaneous EEG and functional MRI data during rest and sleep from humans. Data Brief. 2023;48: 109059. doi:10.1016/j.dib.2023.109059 

59.  Finn ES, Shen X, Scheinost D, Rosenberg MD, Huang J, Chun MM, et al. Functional connectome fingerprinting: identifying individuals using patterns of brain connectivity. Nat Neurosci. 2015;18: 1664–1671. doi:10.1038/nn.4135 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

60.  Höhn C, Hahn MA, Lendner JD, Hoedlmoser K. Spectral Slope and Lempel–Ziv Complexity as Robust Markers of Brain States during Sleep and Wakefulness. eNeuro. 2024;11. doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0259-23.2024 

61.  Zhang Y, Wang Y, Cheng H, Yan F, Li D, Song D, et al. EEG spectral slope: A reliable indicator for continuous evaluation of consciousness levels during propofol anesthesia. NeuroImage. 2023;283: 120426. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120426 

62.  Weijs ML, Missura S, Potok-Szybińska W, Bächinger M, Badii B, Carro-Domínguez M, et al. Modulating cortical excitability and cortical arousal by pupil self-regulation. Nat Commun. 2025;16: 4552. doi:10.1038/s41467-025-59837-5 

63.  Rosenberg MD, Hsu W-T, Scheinost D, Todd Constable R, Chun MM. Connectome-based Models Predict Separable Components of Attention in Novel Individuals. J Cogn Neurosci. 2018;30: 160–173. doi:10.1162/jocn_a_01197 

64.  Cer D, Yang Y, Kong S, Hua N, Limtiaco N, John RS, et al. Universal Sentence Encoder. arXiv; 2018. doi:10.48550/arXiv.1803.11175 

65.  Shen X, Houser T, Smith DV, Murty VP. Machine-learning as a validated tool to characterize individual differences in free recall of naturalistic events. Psychon Bull Rev. 2023;30: 308–316. doi:10.3758/s13423-022-02171-4 

66.  Nau M, Greene A, Tarder-Stoll H, Lossio-Ventura JA, Pereira F, Chen J, et al. Neural and behavioral reinstatement jointly reflect retrieval of narrative events. Nat Commun. 2025;16: 7865. doi:10.1038/s41467-025-62375-9 

67.  Redies C, Grebenkina M, Mohseni M, Kaduhm A, Dobel C. Global Image Properties Predict Ratings of Affective Pictures. Front Psychol. 2020;11. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00953 

68.  Kragel PA, Reddan MC, LaBar KS, Wager TD. Emotion schemas are embedded in the human visual system. Sci Adv. 2019;5: eaaw4358. doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaw4358 

69.  Hanjalic A, Xu L-Q. Affective video content representation and modeling. IEEE Trans Multimed. 2005;7: 143–154. doi:10.1109/TMM.2004.840618 

70.  Conwell C, Graham D, Boccagno C, Vessel EA. The perceptual primacy of feeling: Affectless visual machines explain a majority of variance in human visually evoked affect. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2025;122: e2306025121. doi:10.1073/pnas.2306025121 

71.  Murphy K, Birn RM, Bandettini PA. Resting-state fMRI confounds and cleanup. NeuroImage. 2013;80: 349–359. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.04.001 

72.  Chang C, Glover GH. Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD signals in resting-state fMRI. NeuroImage. 2009;47: 1381–1393. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.04.048 

73.  Xifra-Porxas A, Kassinopoulos M, Mitsis GD. Physiological and motion signatures in static and time-varying functional connectivity and their subject identifiability. Fornito A, Behrens TE, editors. eLife. 2021;10: e62324. doi:10.7554/eLife.62324 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

74.  Phan KL, Taylor SF, Welsh RC, Decker LR, Noll DC, Nichols TE, et al. Activation of the medial prefrontal cortex and extended amygdala by individual ratings of emotional arousal: a fMRI study. Biol Psychiatry. 2003;53: 211–215. doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(02)01485-3 

75.  Wang L, Hu X, Ren Y, Lv J, Zhao S, Guo L, et al. Arousal modulates the amygdala-insula reciprocal connectivity during naturalistic emotional movie watching. NeuroImage. 2023;279: 120316. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2023.120316 

76.  Lewis PA, Critchley HD, Rotshtein P, Dolan RJ. Neural correlates of processing valence and arousal in affective words. Cereb Cortex N Y N 1991. 2007;17: 742–748. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhk024 

77.  Wilson-Mendenhall CD, Barrett LF, Barsalou LW. Neural Evidence That Human Emotions Share Core Affective Properties. Psychol Sci. 2013;24: 947–956. doi:10.1177/0956797612464242 

78.  Phelps EA, Ling S, Carrasco M. Emotion Facilitates Perception and Potentiates the Perceptual Benefits of Attention. Psychol Sci. 2006;17: 292–299. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01701.x 

79.  Frijda NH, Kuipers P, ter Schure E. Relations among emotion, appraisal, and emotional action readiness. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1989;57: 212–228. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.57.2.212 

80.  Rudebeck PH, Putnam PT, Daniels TE, Yang T, Mitz AR, Rhodes SEV, et al. A role for primate subgenual cingulate cortex in sustaining autonomic arousal. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2014;111: 5391–5396. doi:10.1073/pnas.1317695111 

81.  Fujimoto A, Murray EA, Rudebeck PH. Interaction between decision-making and interoceptive representations of bodily arousal in frontal cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci. 2021;118: e2014781118. doi:10.1073/pnas.2014781118 

82.  Critchley HD, Tang J, Glaser D, Butterworth B, Dolan RJ. Anterior cingulate activity during error and autonomic response. NeuroImage. 2005;27: 885–895. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.05.047 

83.  Ebitz RB, Platt ML. Neuronal Activity in Primate Dorsal Anterior Cingulate Cortex Signals Task Conflict and Predicts Adjustments in Pupil-Linked Arousal. Neuron. 2015;85: 628–640. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2014.12.053 

84.  Rudolph S, Badura A, Lutzu S, Pathak SS, Thieme A, Verpeut JL, et al. Cognitive-Affective Functions of the Cerebellum. J Neurosci. 2023;43: 7554–7564. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1451-23.2023 

85.  Styliadis C, Ioannides AA, Bamidis PD, Papadelis C. Distinct cerebellar lobules process arousal, valence and their interaction in parallel following a temporal hierarchy. NeuroImage. 2015;110: 149–161. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.02.006 

86.  Kay BP, Wheelock MD, Siegel JS, Raut RV, Chauvin RJ, Metoki A, et al. Stimulant medications affect arousal and reward, not attention networks. Cell. 2025;188: 7529-7546.e20. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2025.11.039 

87.  Lyu Y, Corriveau A, Molla H, Wit H de, Rosenberg MD. Methamphetamine modulates functional connectivity signatures of sustained attention and arousal. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2025;0. doi:10.1016/j.bpsc.2025.11.005 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 11, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.08.730730 doi: bioRxiv preprint

88.  Esteban O, Markiewicz CJ, Blair RW, Moodie CA, Isik AI, Erramuzpe A, et al. fMRIPrep: a robust preprocessing pipeline for functional MRI. Nat Methods. 2019;16: 111–116. doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0235-4 

89.  Nilearn contributors, Chamma A, Frau-Pascual A, Rothberg A, Abadie A, Abraham A, et al. nilearn. Zenodo; 2026. doi:10.5281/ZENODO.8397156 

90.  Picton TW, Bentin S, Berg P, Donchin E, Hillyard SA, Johnson R, et al. Guidelines for using human event-related potentials to study cognition: recording standards and publication criteria. Psychophysiology. 2000;37: 127–152. 

91.  Berg P, Scherg M. A multiple source approach to the correction of eye artifacts. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1994;90: 229–241. doi:10.1016/0013-4694(94)90094-9 

92.  Gu Y, Han F, Sainburg LE, Schade MM, Buxton OM, Duyn JH, et al. An orderly sequence of autonomic and neural events at transient arousal changes. NeuroImage. 2022;264: 119720. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119720 

93.  Schaefer A, Kong R, Gordon EM, Laumann TO, Zuo X-N, Holmes AJ, et al. Local-Global Parcellation of the Human Cerebral Cortex from Intrinsic Functional Connectivity MRI. Cereb Cortex. 2018;28: 3095–3114. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhx179 

94.  Heusser AC, Fitzpatrick PC, Manning JR. Geometric models reveal behavioural and neural signatures of transforming experiences into memories. Nat Hum Behav. 2021;5: 905–919. doi:10.1038/s41562-021-01051-6 

95.  Bürkner P-C. Bayesian Item Response Modeling in R with brms and Stan. J Stat Softw. 2021;100: 1–54. doi:10.18637/jss.v100.i05 

96.  Xia M, Wang J, He Y. BrainNet Viewer: A Network Visualization Tool for Human Brain Connectomics. PLOS ONE. 2013;8: e68910. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068910