Title: Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence: Towards Improving the Reasoning Abilities of Large Language Models

URL Source: https://www.ijcai.org/proceedings/2025/1195.pdf

Published Time: Thu, 18 Sep 2025 15:19:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Neuro-Symbolic Artificial Intelligence: Towards Improving the Reasoning Abilities of Large Language Models 

# Xiao-Wen Yang 1,2∗ , Jie-Jing Shao 1∗ , Lan-Zhe Guo 1,3∗ , Bo-Wen Zhang 1,3 ,

# Zhi Zhou 1 , Lin-Han Jia 1 , Wang-Zhou Dai 1,3 and Yu-Feng Li 1,2†

> 1

# National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China 

> 2

# School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China 

> 3

# School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, China 

# {yangxw, shaojj, guolz, zhangbw, zhouz, jialh, daiwz, liyf }@lamda.nju.edu.cn 

# Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown promising results across various tasks, yet their reasoning capabilities remain a fundamental chal-lenge. Developing AI systems with strong rea-soning capabilities is regarded as a crucial mile-stone in the pursuit of Artificial General Intel-ligence (AGI) and has garnered considerable at-tention from both academia and industry. Var-ious techniques have been explored to enhance the reasoning capabilities of LLMs, with neuro-symbolic approaches being a particularly promis-ing way. This paper comprehensively reviews re-cent developments in neuro-symbolic approaches for enhancing LLM reasoning. We first present a formalization of reasoning tasks and give abrief introduction to the neuro-symbolic learning paradigm. Then, we discuss neuro-symbolic meth-ods for improving the reasoning capabilities of LLMs from three perspectives: Symbolic →LLM ,

LLM →Symbolic , and LLM +Symbolic . Finally, we discuss several key challenges and promising fu-ture directions. We have also released a GitHub repository including papers and resources related to this survey: https://github.com/LAMDASZ-ML/Awesome-LLM-Reasoning-with-NeSy. 

# 1 Introduction 

The development of artificial intelligence (AI) has evolved through distinct phases, shaped by different paradigms. Sym-bolic AI , focused on manipulating symbols, logic, rules, and knowledge to mimic human problem-solving abilities, laid the foundation for AI research before the 1990s. How-ever, it encountered significant challenges, particularly re-garding scalability and flexibility to real-world applications with noisy raw sensory inputs. On the other hand, Con-nectionist AI , centered on neural networks and achieved re-markable success in data-driven machine learning. More re-cently, building on the success of transformer models, LLMs have demonstrated promising results in various tasks. How-ever, many researchers have reported that LLMs struggle with complex reasoning problems; they only attempt to replicate reasoning steps in training data, and cannot really reason. More efforts must be devoted to overcoming these bottle-necks for developing strong reasoning models. Building AI models with strong reasoning capabilities is a crucial milestone toward achieving AGI. To this end, nu-merous researchers have focused on enhancing the reason-ing abilities of LLMs. Existing studies can be categorized into three categories based on the different stages of the rea-soning model construction: Data Construction , including how to automatically generate/augment/annotate/select data with reasoning paths; Fine-Tuning , including supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement fine-tuning on reasoning special-ized datasets, and Inference , including inference techniques ranging from CoT to test-time scaling. Various large reason-ing models have also been released, including OpenAI O1, Qwen-QwQ, DeepSeek-R1, etc. Among these explorations, Neuro-Symbolic (NeSy) meth-ods demonstrate superior performance. NeSy aims to inte-grate the strengths of symbolic AI, which excels in complex reasoning, with neural networks, which are adept at learning from large datasets [De Raedt et al. , 2020]. By integrating these approaches, we can build AI systems that not only learn from large datasets but also handle complex reasoning tasks in a human-like manner. NeSy AI aligns with the Dual Pro-cess Theory in cognitive science, which posits that human cognition consists of two systems: System 1, which is fast, intuitive, and unconscious (neural networks), and System 2, which is slower, more deliberate, and conscious, focusing on logical reasoning and problem-solving (symbolic reasoning). Therefore, NeSy is naturally a promising way to improve the reasoning abilities of LLMs. In this paper, we aim to give a brief introduction on how to exploit NeSy methods to improve LLM reasoning. We first give a formulation of reasoning tasks in LLMs (§2). Next, we give an introduction about the basic NeSy paradigm (§3). Then, we discuss how NeSy methods could improve the reasoning abilities of LLMs from three perspectives, 

Symbolic →LLM , LLM →Symbolic , LLM +Symbolic (§4). Fi-nally, by examining these advancements, we discuss open challenges in this field and outline potential future work (§7). Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10770

# 2 What is Reasoning? 

The general reasoning task can be characterized as a recur-sive process in which each step builds upon the preceding reasoning steps. Formally, the task is defined as follows: given an input problem Q and background knowledge K,the goal is to get the answer A, satisfying A = f (Q, K ),where f denotes the function mapping the problem and back-ground knowledge to the answer. The Q and K can be repre-sented in different forms, such as natural language or sym-bolic. For the reasoning tasks, we also have a reasoning path Z consists of a sequence of intermediate reasoning steps, 

Z = {z1, z 2, . . . , z n}, where zi represents the i-th step and satisfies zi = gi(Q, K, z 1, z 2, ..., z i−1). Here, gi is a reason-ing function of the i-th step that incorporates the input prob-lem, the background knowledge, and the previous steps. The final answer A corresponds to the result of the last step in the reasoning path, i.e., A = zn.The reasoning function g(·) plays a central role across various reasoning scenarios, determining how new reason-ing steps or conclusions are generated based on background knowledge and prior reasoning steps. The specific interpre-tations of the reasoning function g(·) vary across three pri-mary reasoning types: deductive reasoning, inductive reason-ing, and abductive reasoning. • Deductive Reasoning : In deductive reasoning, the reason-ing function g(·) applies rules in the knowledge base K to the intermediate steps to generate new reasoning steps or conclusions. Formally, 

zi = ApplyLogicRules (Q, K, z 1, z 2, ..., z i−1)

where ApplyLogicRules (·) is an operation based on formal logic. • Inductive Reasoning : Inductive reasoning involves gener-alizing patterns or rules from specific examples. The rea-soning function g(·) extracts broader patterns from the in-termediate steps. Formally, 

zi = InducePattern (Q, K, z 1, z 2, ..., z i−1)

where InducePattern (·) is a pattern-discovery func-tion, often relying on statistics, machine learning, or human expertise. • Abductive Reasoning : Abductive reasoning generates hy-potheses to explain observed phenomena. The reasoning function g(·) identifies the most possible hypothesis for the previous reasoning steps. Formally, 

zi = GenerateHypothesis (Q, K, z 1, z 2, ..., z i−1)

where GenerateHypothesis (·) is a hypothesis gener-ation function that seeks to identify the most plausible hy-pothesis to explain zi−1.

# 3 What is Neuro-Symbolic AI? 

Neuro-symbolic AI seeks to combine the learning capabil-ities of neural networks with the reasoning power of sym-bolic AI. This integration enables the development of AI sys-tems that can learn from extensive datasets while applying knowledge, rules, and logical reasoning, allowing them to tackle tasks that require both intuitive and deliberate think-ing. Specifically, we categorize neuro-symbolic AI into three types: Neuro helps Symbolic , Symbolic helps Neuro , and Hy-brid Neuro-Symbolic Architecture . For a more fine-grained categorization, please refer to Henry A. Kautz’s lecture in AAAI 2020 [Kautz, 2022]. 

3.1 Neuro helps Symbolic 

This branch predominantly relies on symbolic processing, yet incorporates neural networks to address limitations of sym-bolic systems. Pure symbolic AI faces some key limitations, e.g., 1) large search spaces that hinder efficient problem-solving; 2) dependence on precisely defined symbols, lim-iting the representation of abstract real-world concepts; and 3) a rigid, deterministic reasoning process that struggles with ambiguity and uncertainty. These challenges can be ad-dressed by integrating neural components, leading to the pro-posal of various NeSy approaches. Exploiting neural networks to accelerate reasoning in sym-bolic systems represents a classic technique, with a notable example being AlphaGo [Silver et al. , 2016]. AlphaGo inte-grates neural networks into MCTS, employing reinforcement learning on large-scale datasets to train policy and value net-works. This integration provides heuristic acceleration for symbolic search, significantly overcoming the limitation of the pure symbolic system. To overcome the limitations of symbolic systems in grounding abstract symbolic concepts into sub-symbolic real-world representations, neural networks can be exploited to directly extract symbolic concepts from raw data. This is a well-established and enduring research area [Taddeo and Floridi, 2005]. One recent representative work is NS-CL [Mao et al. , 2019], which uses a convolutional neural net-work to parse images and extract features, while symbolic reasoning modules interpret these features to answer complex questions about the images. To address the limitations of symbolic systems in han-dling ambiguity and uncertain reasoning, various studies have focused on making the symbolic process differentiable. Aprime example is ∂ILP [Evans and Grefenstette, 2018], which introduces the differentiable properties of neural networks into inductive logic programming (ILP). These approaches preserve symbolic logical reasoning while leveraging neural networks to process uncertain and probabilistic information, enabling the recognition of complex patterns. 

3.2 Symbolic helps Neuro 

This branch of studies predominantly relies on neural net-works, yet incorporates symbolic components to facilitate specialized features, such as logical reasoning, or improve interpretability and trustworthiness. Predominantly, there are two main methodologies to achieve this integration. The first way is symbolic regularization approaches, which treat symbolic knowledge and rules as optimization con-straints in the learning objective to guide the training pro-cess of neural networks, ensuring that the model’s predictions align more closely with domain-specific knowledge. Repre-sentative methods include Semantic Loss [Xu et al. , 2018], Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10771 Figure 1: Illustration of how symbolic methods can be exploited to provide reasoning data for LLMs.

which directly incorporates logical constraints into the train-ing process as a penalization term, and Logic Tensor Net-works (LTNs) [Badreddine et al. , 2022], which combine first-order logic with tensor-based computations, allowing neural networks to learn representations that satisfy logical rules. The second way is model-based approaches, which try to modify the neural network by infusing symbolic knowledge into its structure directly, rather than externally guiding the training process of neural networks using constraints. This can be achieved by designing specific layers or modules that are informed by symbolic rules [Marra et al. , 2020]. Com-pared with regularization techniques, model-based methods embed symbolic knowledge directly into the model’s struc-ture and ensure the knowledge is always considered in both the training and inference stages. 

3.3 Hybrid Neuro-Symbolic Architecture 

Different from previous categories that are “symbolic-heavy” or “neural-heavy”, various studies seek to design new hy-brid neuro-symbolic architecture to make symbolic and neu-ral networks work simultaneously in a framework to better exploit their strengths. DeepProbLog [Manhaeve et al. , 2019] and Abductive Learning (ABL) [Zhou, 2019] are two representative meth-ods. DeepProbLog [Manhaeve et al. , 2019] integrates deep learning and probabilistic logic, focusing on the interaction between learning and reasoning. It extends probabilistic programming by introducing neural predicates, which act as a bridge between neural networks and symbolic reason-ing. This allows the system to harness the strengths of both paradigms: the pattern recognition capabilities of deep learning and the structured reasoning of logic programming. By enabling end-to-end training, DeepProbLog demonstrates powerful abilities for tasks requiring both perception and log-ical inference. Abductive learning [Zhou, 2019] offers a framework that bridges machine learning and logical reason-ing through inconsistency minimization, enabling the gener-ation of pseudo-labels for intermediate symbolic concepts. Unlike DeepProbLog, ABL does not aim to make the sym-bolic system differentiable. Instead, it fully leverages the rea-soning capabilities inherent in symbolic knowledge by em-ploying abductive reasoning to sample pseudo-labels for in-termediate symbols. Both methods are capable of concur-rently updating neural networks and symbolic systems. In this paper, we follow the above categorization and dis-cuss neuro-symbolic AI for improving the reasoning abilities of LLMs in a similar categorization, i.e., Symbolic →LLM, LLM →Symbolic, and LLM +Symbolic. Given the breadth of research in this area, we respectfully acknowledge that our discussion is limited to a subset of representative works that most effectively convey the key concepts. 

# 4 Symbolic → LLM: Addressing the Reasoning Data Scarcity 

Creating large-scale reasoning datasets with high-quality rea-soning paths is essential for enhancing the reasoning capa-bilities of LLMs. However, constructing such datasets poses significant challenges, as ensuring logical rigor and coher-ence in step-by-step reasoning processes is inherently diffi-cult. Moreover, data annotation, particularly step-wise anno-tation, is highly resource-intensive, further complicating the dataset development process. In contrast, symbolic methods are characterized by their rigorous reasoning abilities, offer-ing a promising way to investigate how they might compen-sate for the lack of sufficient reasoning data. In this section, we illustrate how to explore symbolic meth-ods to help address the reasoning data scarcity problem. Specifically, we explore this direction from two perspectives, 

Symbolic Generation, LLM Imitation and LLM Formalize, Symbolic Augment . The main ideas of these paradigms are illustrated in Figure 1. 

4.1 Symbolic Generation, LLM Imitation 

For problems that can be solved using symbolic methods, we can leverage these methods to generate logically rigor-ous reasoning paths. Fine-tuning LLMs on such datasets en-ables them to learn and potentially mimic the reasoning ca-pabilities of symbolic methods. This idea is quite similar to knowledge distillation, but instead of distilling data from a stronger model, it distills data from symbolic methods. Rep-resentative symbolic methods that can be applied to generate Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10772 Figure 2: Illustration of how LLMs integrate symbolic solvers, programs, tools, or search algorithms to facilitate the reasoning process.

reasoning data, including but not limited to logical reason-ing algorithms, logic solvers, constraint optimization, search algorithms, etc. Numerous efforts have been devoted to leveraging various symbolic methods for generating reasoning data and fine-tuning LLMs to be applied in different tasks. For example, AlphaGeometry [Trinh et al. , 2024] develops a symbolic de-duction engine to obtain the reasoning solutions to geome-try problems, and surpasses the performance of the average IMO contestant in proving Euclidean plane geometry theo-rems. LOGIPT [Feng et al. , 2024] proposes to generate log-ical reasoning processes via logical solvers and fine-tuning LLMs to mimic the reasoning process of logical solvers, en-abling LLMs to acquire similar abilities for tackling deduc-tive reasoning tasks. Procedure Cloning [Yang et al. , 2022], DualFormer [Su et al. , 2025], and SOS [Gandhi et al. , 2024] generate search traces with search algorithms, such as DFS, BFS, A ∗, MCTS, etc, and fine-tune LLMs to enable the model to learn to search and backtrack in the reasoning procedure. Planformer [Pallagani et al. , 2022] generates plans for classi-cal planning tasks with the FastDownward planner and con-structs a PDDL-based dataset to fine-tune LLMs for plan-ning tasks. The goal of these methods is to internalize the abilities of the symbolic solvers into the LLMs by construct-ing datasets for fine-tuning the model, thereby enhancing the LLM’s reasoning abilities. 

4.2 LLM Formalize, Symbolic Augment 

Unlike previous studies that focus on generating reasoning data with symbolic methods and fine-tuning LLMs to mimic their capabilities, this line of research takes a different di-rection that aims to augment data with symbolic methods. The pipeline can typically be summarized as: firstly, we can transform informal natural language data into a formalized representation space; secondly, we employ symbolic rules or solvers to help augment the data in the formalized space; thirdly, we transform the symbolically represented data into natural language. The help of symbolic rules or solvers en-ables the automatic augmentation of reasoning data that is both linguistically diverse and logically rigorous, compared to data augmentation with LLMs solely. There are also various studies in this direction. For exam-ple, NSDG [Li et al. , 2024] formalizes the language repre-sented math problems into its symbolic version, represented by the SMT-LIB language, and mutates the symbolic prob-lem to create new variants for the data augmentation. Then, the symbolic form is converted to the natural language ver-sion. LLMs act as a bridge between symbolic and natural language spaces in this process. AMR-DA [Shou et al. , 2022] converts the original language data into an abstract meaning representation graph (AMR), a structured semantic represen-tation that encapsulates the logical structure of the sentence, upon which operations are performed to generate logically modified AMR graphs. The modified AMR graphs are sub-sequently converted back into text to create augmented data. Similar ideas have also been adopted in the legal reason-ing [Zhou et al. , 2025], logical reasoning [Qi et al. , 2025], theorem proving [ ¨ Unsal et al. , 2024], etc. Such methods excel in ensuring the logical correctness of generated data through symbolic reasoning and unlocking the potential for unlimited data generation, as the complexity of symbolic spaces pro-vides nearly infinite possibilities, greatly expanding the di-versity and scale of available reasoning datasets. 

# 5 LLM → Symbolic: Addressing the Reasoning Function Error 

From the formulation of reasoning tasks, it can be observed that the reasoning function g(·) serves as the core compo-nent in the reasoning process. LLMs typically employ auto-regressive techniques to approximate this reasoning function. However, this approach inherently introduces errors. Even minor inaccuracies at each step can propagate and amplify over successive steps, eventually causing the reasoning out-comes to deviate substantially from the correct answers. To address errors in reasoning functions, it is a promising way to replace the auto-regressive style reasoning function with external symbolic methods to enhance the rigor of in-termediate reasoning steps. The underlying intuition is that LLMs are inherently less adept at precise, long-chain reason-ing. Therefore, enabling them to learn how to invoke exter-nal modules provides a more effective approach to solving complex reasoning problems. Formally, for given indices i

and j (j > i), this type of method can be expressed as: 

zj = ExternalModules (zi). Here, the reasoning steps are represented symbolically, serving as a prerequisite for ap-plying such methods. The ExternalModules represents an external module that processes the input zi and produces the output zj directly. The commonly external modules in-clude symbolic solvers, program interpreters, off-the-shelf models, APIs, tools, search algorithms, etc. The main ideas of these methods are illustrated in Figure 2. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10773

5.1 Symbolic Solver Aided Methods 

The core idea of symbolic solver aided methods is to uti-lize external symbolic solvers, such as logic programming, SMT solvers, theorem provers, PDDL planners, constraint optimization tools, etc, to replace multiple reasoning func-tions performed internally. The pipeline of these methods is straightforward: first, translate natural language problems into a formalized representation that symbolic solvers can process, then call the solver to derive the solution. LogicLM [Pan et al. , 2023] and LINC [Olausson et al. ,2023] are some of the earlier attempts at this approach. These methods transform natural language problems into ex-ecutable logical expressions and leverage logic solvers to ob-tain results. There is also a branch of studies that focuses on exploiting classical planning methods to deal with plan-ning tasks such as classical planning or robotics. For ex-ample, LLM+P [Liu et al. , 2023] propose to incorporate a PPDL-based symbolic planner. It leverages the semantic un-derstanding abilities of LLM to translate informal language into a formal PDDL language and then employs the Fast-Downward solver for the planning process. An important research direction related to these methods is how to automatically translate natural language represented data into a formalized symbolic representation. This is also called AutoFormalization . Representative studies include aut-oformalization of first-order logic, mathematical statements, mathematical proofs, PDDL, symbolic world models, etc. Key challenges lie in how to improve the consistency and the efficiency of the autoformalization process. 

5.2 Program-Aided Methods 

Instead of exploiting symbolic solvers, there are also various studies that aim to exploit the program interpreter to help im-prove the accuracy of reasoning functions. The main pipeline is similar to symbolic solver aided methods, with the key difference being that these methods convert natural language into a programming language and leverage a program execu-tor to derive the solution. PAL (Program-Aided Language Model) [Gao et al. , 2023] and PoT (Program of Thought) [Chen et al. , 2023] are two representative program-aided methods. Specifically, they adopt LLMs to express the reasoning process as Python pro-gramming languages, and the computation is relegated to an external program executor. Except for the Python programs, Binder [Cheng et al. , 2023] converts the input problem to SQL and executes the program interpreter to obtain the an-swer. Instead of relying on the code interpreter solely, CoC (Chain of Code) [Li et al. , 2023] generates code or pseudo-code and then executes the code with a code interpreter if possible, and with an LMulator (language model emulating code) otherwise. Related methods have been successfully ap-plied to mathematical reasoning, code generation, robotics, etc. These methods can be seen as augmenting the chain of thought with external program interpreters to enable more ac-curate and robust reasoning. 

5.3 Tool-Aided Methods 

Beyond symbolic solvers and program interpreters, numerous other tools, APIs, and off-the-shelf models that have been de-veloped for various tasks can also be exploited to enhance the accuracy of reasoning functions. Examples include cal-culators for numerical computations, web search engines for common-sense reasoning, and pre-trained vision models for visual reasoning. Different from symbolic solver or program aided methods, which translate the natural language problems into a formal-ized language, and call the symbolic solver or program ex-ecutor to obtain the solution directly, tool-aided methods are more complex, since they typically require calling different tools in different reasoning steps. Therefore, the pipeline can be divided into four stages: task planning , tool selection , tool calling , response generation .For example, in the visual reasoning tasks, VisProg [Gupta and Kembhavi, 2023] utilizes LLMs to generate a Python-like API call program, integrating various tools, such as image processing subroutines in OpenCV, and off-the-shelf vision models, to perform complex visual reasoning tasks based on natural language instructions. These ideas inspired various subsequent studies such as ViperGPT [Sur´ ıs et al. , 2023], Chameleon [Lu et al. , 2024], VisualSkechpad [Hu et al. ,2024b], etc. For mathematical reasoning, Tora [Gou et al. ,2024] explores the integration of LLMs with the utilization of external tools such as computation libraries and symbolic solvers. The key differences among these methods lie in the choice of tool libraries tailored to specific tasks and the strate-gies used to equip LLMs with accurate tool-utilization capa-bilities. These strategies include prompt techniques and fine-tuning the model on a diverse set of collected tool-use trajec-tories, such as SFT or RLFT. 

5.4 Search Augmented Methods 

The core process of traditional symbolic solvers, such as SMT solvers or PDDL planners, can be abstractly modeled as a search problem: finding solutions that satisfy given constraints within a potentially vast or even infinite solution space, and adopting various pruning strategies and optimiza-tion techniques to accelerate the search process. To achieve similar abilities to these symbolic methods, various methods aim to directly combine the search algorithms with the decod-ing procedure of LLMs to enhance the reasoning capabilities of LLMs. Formally, at the i-th step of reasoning, T reason-ing functions are expanded, producing T candidate reasoning results: z(t) 

> i

= g(t) 

> i

(Q, K, z 1, z 2, . . . , z i−1), t = 1 , 2, ..., T ,where g(t) 

> i

represents the t-th reasoning function, and this can be realized by using the sampling mechanism of a lan-guage model. Consequently, the reasoning process can be transformed into a search problem, allowing the incorpora-tion of various search algorithms. For example, DBS [Zhu et al. , 2024] proposes a decod-ing algorithm that integrates self-evaluation guidance via the beam search. SPaR [Cheng et al. , 2025] proposes a self-play framework integrating BFS and DFS to refine the response and improve the instruction-following abilities of LLMs. ChinaTravel [Shao et al. , 2024] exploits BFS and DFS to improve the travel planning abilities of LLMs. Neuro-logicA* [Lu et al. , 2022] incorporates heuristic estimates of future cost in the decoding process, like the A* search algo-Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10774 Figure 3: Illustration of the main ideas of end-to-end LLM+symbolic reasoning, including symbolic formatted reasoning, differential sym-bolic modules, and symbolic feedback.

rithms. Moreover, building on the advantages of MCTS in Al-phaGo and AlphaZero, numerous studies have been devoted to exploring the integration of MCTS in the LLMs’ inference stage to extend reasoning chains and improve reasoning accu-racy. The difference in this line of research mainly lies in the choice of search algorithms and their intended role, whether to guide more effective exploration in the reasoning process or to refine reward estimation through simulation. However, these methods have clear limitations, since more exploration leads to a huge computation cost in the inference time. 

# 6 Symbolic + LLMs: End-to-End Reasoning 

In the previous two branches of research, LLMs and sym-bolic methods operate separately. For example, for the symbolic →LLMs paradigm, symbolic AI methods are re-sponsible for generating or augmenting data, after which the LLMs are fine-tuned on these datasets. For LLMs →symbolic paradigm, the LLMs call symbolic solvers, which then de-rive the answer. A holy-grail problem for neuro-symbolic AI is designing mechanisms that enable symbolic methods and neural networks to work in a more hybrid or end-to-end fash-ion. Specifically, we review efforts about Symbolic +LLMs in this direction from three perspectives, i.e., symbolic for-matted reasoning, differential symbolic module, and sym-bolic feedback. The main ideas are illustrated in Figure 3. 

6.1 Symbolic Formatted Reasoning 

For the reasoning process in LLMs, the reasoning path Z can be represented in various forms, such as natural language or latent embedding. In certain reasoning tasks, these represen-tations may be prone to inaccuracies. Such representational errors can accumulate progressively as the reasoning chain lengthens, ultimately leading to significant deviations from the correct reasoning solutions. To mitigate potential representation errors in reasoning chains, we may adopt formally symbolic representations to describe intermediate reasoning states, instead of relying solely on natural language descriptions or latent embedding. This symbolic representation offers significant advantages by providing more explicit and precise semantic expressions, thereby avoiding errors caused by the ambiguity of natural language or the vagueness of latent embedding. Formally, 

∀i̸ = n, z i ∈ L , where L denotes a symbolic language de-fined over a predetermined alphabet. The final answer, A, is derived from this sequence of intermediate symbolic repre-sentations. Symbolic formatted reasoning is particularly suitable for tasks that can be precisely symbolized, such as mathematical reasoning. For example, NaturalPrompt [Ling et al. , 2023] enables LLMs to generate deductive reasoning chains using a proposed natural program format, Chain-of-Symbol prompt-ing [Hu et al. , 2024a] prompts LLMs to convert natural lan-guage into concise symbolic representations, enhancing their performance on spatial tasks while significantly reducing to-ken consumption. LogicGuide [Poesia et al. , 2024] intro-duces a general logical reasoning system to assist the LLM. It formalizes the reasoning process within LogicGuide, en-suring that step-by-step reasoning remains sound and reli-able. There are also some methods that use programming lan-guages like Python as the symbolic language for intermedi-ate representations [Weir et al. , 2024]. Unlike program-aided methods, the Python code is not executed but rather serves solely as a structured prompt to guide the model toward the fi-nal answer. These methods leverage symbolic representations to mitigate potential representation error accumulation inher-ent in natural language representations during the reasoning process. Alongside natural language and latent embedding representation reasoning, they form the three primary reason-ing formations. 

6.2 Differential Symbolic Module 

Unlike machine learning, which relies on continuous nu-merical optimization, symbolic AI methods are typically grounded in discrete symbolic reduction. Consequently, de-signing a unified optimization framework that allows machine learning and symbolic reasoning to be jointly optimized re-mains a fundamental challenge. A promising direction is to develop differential symbolic modules to enable the symbolic reasoning systems to work with the machine learning models. In classical NeSy studies, many efforts have been devoted to this direction. More recently, studies have emerged to de-velop differentiable symbolic modules that can seamlessly in-tegrate with LLMs. For example, DiLA [Zhang et al. , 2024] leverages LLMs to parse natural language represented prob-lem into a SAT problem which consists of a set of logical Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10775

formulas, then LLM generates an initial solution based on its natural language understanding, next the relaxed variable and extracted constraints are offloaded to a differential logic layer, checking the constraint satisfiability, and updating the solution until all constraints are met. Oreoml [Hu et al. , 2022] propose to integrate knowledge graph reasoning of symbolic logic and neural networks, enabling the LLMs to work to-gether with a differentiable knowledge graph reasoning mod-ule through the knowledge interaction layers embedded in the LLMs. NSVQA [Amizadeh et al. , 2020] leverages predi-cates as symbolic representations linked to neural modules that process visual elements, disentangle visual representa-tion learning from the inference mechanism, and propose a differentiable first-order logic formalism based on fuzzy logic for compositional visual reasoning. AutoCoNN [Weng et al. ,2024] proposes a framework that synergistically integrates compiled neural networks (CoNNs) into the standard trans-former architecture. CoNNs are neural modules designed to explicitly encode rules through artificially generated at-tention weights. By incorporating CoNN modules, the neu-ral comprehension framework enables LLMs to execute rule-intensive symbolic tasks. These methods represent initial attempts to enable joint op-timization of logical reasoning and LLM fine-tuning. How-ever, they still face significant challenges, such as open con-cepts, optimization efficiency, generality, etc. More efforts are needed to improve the efficiency, scalability, and robust-ness of these methods. 

6.3 Symbolic Feedback 

Supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement fine-tuning are two main learning paradigms for enhancing the reasoning capabil-ities of pre-trained LLMs. Both rely on supervisory signals, such as the supervised loss and the reward function, to guide the learning process. Symbolic methods offer more precise and interpretable verification capabilities. Therefore, explor-ing how to leverage them as regularization terms in the loss function for supervised fine-tuning or reward signals in rein-forcement fine-tuning represents a promising and important research direction. For supervised fine-tuning, [Premsri and Kordjamshidi, 2025] proposes to fine-tune LLMs by exploiting the spa-tial logical rules as constraints, providing additional super-vision to improve spatial reasoning. For reinforcement fine-tuning, SyreLM [Dutta et al. , 2024] adopts a small frozen LM, equipped with an adapter, to translate natural language problems into formal language expressions, and adopts rein-forcement learning to train the adapted LM, informed by the non-differentiable symbolic solver. RBR [Mu et al. , 2024] proposes rule-based rewards to improve the safety of LLMs. RLSF [Jha et al. , 2024] exploits various reasoning or domain knowledge tools (e.g., symbolic solvers, theorem provers, or knowledge bases) to provide feedback to the LLMs. Similar ideas have also been adopted by LLM-Modulo [Kambham-pati et al. , 2024] for planning tasks, Cotran [Jana et al. , 2024] for code generation tasks, etc. This line of research is related to neuro-symbolic reinforcement learning. The advantages of these methods lie in that it does not require the symbolic methods to be differentiable. 

# 7 Challenges & Open Research Directions 

Despite the promising advances in NeSy approaches for en-hancing reasoning capabilities in LLMs, several challenges persist. This section discusses key challenges and proposes open research directions to address them. 

Multi-Modal Reasoning Previous studies mainly focus on reasoning in language modality. Various real-world applica-tions require multi-modal reasoning, such as VQA, embodied AI, spatial intelligence, etc. How to effectively exploit sym-bolic systems that are integrated with multi-modal language models remains an open problem. Moreover, existing multi-modal reasoning is mainly conducted on the language modal-ities. In contrast, human reasoning often involves the simulta-neous processing of multiple modalities. For example, when solving geometry problems, humans may draw auxiliary lines on diagrams to support their reasoning. This highlights a sig-nificant gap between current approaches and human manner multi-modal reasoning. 

Advanced Hybrid Architectures Though LLMs achieve promising results across various tasks, they remain data-driven machine learning models that rely on statistical pattern recognition rather than formal logical reasoning. To construct AI systems with both abilities to exploit big data and perform rigorous reasoning, it is important to develop more advanced hybrid neuro-symbolic architectures that seamlessly integrate LLMs and symbolic reasoning components. More advanced optimization techniques are also required to improve the scal-ability and efficiency of these architectures. 

Theoretical Understanding The theoretical understanding of how symbolic methods enhance the reasoning abilities of LLMs is crucial for guiding the design of more effective al-gorithms. However, efforts towards this direction remain lim-ited. For example, the generalization performance with sym-bolic methods, optimization theory for the LLMs fine-tuning with symbolic feedback, analysis on the reasoning shortcuts, the relationship between scaling laws and the integration of symbolic methods, etc. Further efforts are needed to estab-lish solid theoretical foundations for LLMs’ reasoning. 

# 8 Conclusion 

Improving the reasoning capabilities of AI models is a key milestone towards AGI. This paper explores the role of neuro-symbolic methods in enhancing reasoning in LLMs. We give a formulation of reasoning tasks and introduce the main ideas from three perspectives, Symbolic → LLM, LLM → Sym-bolic, and LLM + Symbolic, to explore how symbolic meth-ods can be exploited to address critical challenges in LLMs’ reasoning, including reasoning data scarcity, reasoning func-tion errors, representation errors, etc. Open challenges and opportunities are also discussed. Given the rapid development of this field and the vast num-ber of publications, it is not feasible to cover all papers com-prehensively. Instead, we focus on presenting the key ideas and technical approaches. We aim for this paper to provide an up-to-date summary of recent advancements and inspire new insights into the integration of symbolic AI methods with LLMs for the development of strong reasoning models. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10776

# Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by National Science Foundation of China (62306133, 62206124), Key Program of Jiangsu Science Foundation (BK20243012), Jiangsu Science Founda-tion Leading-edge Technology Program (BK20232003) and Major Program (JD) of Hubei Province (2023BAA024). 

# Contribution Statement 

Equal contribution ( ∗): Xiao-Wen Yang, Jie-Jing Shao and Lan-Zhe Guo. Corresponding author( †): Yu-Feng Li. 

# References 

[Amizadeh et al. , 2020] Saeed Amizadeh, Hamid Palangi, Alex Polozov, Yichen Huang, and Kazuhito Koishida. Neuro-symbolic visual reasoning: Disentangling visual from reasoning. In ICML , pages 279–290, 2020. [Badreddine et al. , 2022] Samy Badreddine, Artur d’Avila Garcez, Luciano Serafini, and Michael Spranger. Logic tensor networks. Artificial Intelligence , 2022. [Chen et al. , 2023] Wenhu Chen, Xueguang Ma, Xinyi Wang, and William W Cohen. Program of thoughts prompting: Disentangling computation from reasoning for numerical reasoning tasks. TMLR , 2023. [Cheng et al. , 2023] Zhoujun Cheng, Tianbao Xie, Peng Shi, et al. Binding language models in symbolic languages. In 

ICLR , 2023. [Cheng et al. , 2025] Jiale Cheng, Xiao Liu, Cunxiang Wang, Xiaotao Gu, Yida Lu, Dan Zhang, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, Hongning Wang, and Minlie Huang. Spar: Self-play with tree-search refinement to improve instruction-following in large language models. In ICLR , 2025. [De Raedt et al. , 2020] Luc De Raedt, Sebastijan Du-manci’c, Robin Manhaeve, and Giuseppe Marra. From sta-tistical relational to neuro-symbolic artificial intelligence. 

preprint arXiv:2003.08316 , 2020. [Dutta et al. , 2024] Subhabrata Dutta, Ishan Pandey, Joykirat Singh, Sunny Manchanda, Soumen Chakrabarti, and Tan-moy Chakraborty. Frugal LMs trained to invoke symbolic solvers achieve parameter-efficient arithmetic reasoning. In AAAI , pages 17951–17959, 2024. [Evans and Grefenstette, 2018] Richard Evans and Edward Grefenstette. Learning explanatory rules from noisy data. 

JAIR , 2018. [Feng et al. , 2024] Jiazhan Feng, Ruochen Xu, Junheng Hao, Hiteshi Sharma, Yelong Shen, Dongyan Zhao, and Weizhu Chen. Language models can be deductive solvers. In NAACL Findings , pages 4026–4042, 2024. [Gandhi et al. , 2024] Kanishk Gandhi, Denise HJ Lee, Gabriel Grand, Muxin Liu, Winson Cheng, Archit Sharma, and Noah Goodman. Stream of search (SOS): Learning to search in language. In COLM , 2024. [Gao et al. , 2023] Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig. PAL: Program-aided language models. In ICML , pages 10764–10799, 2023. [Gou et al. , 2024] Zhibin Gou, Zhihong Shao, Yeyun Gong, Yelong Shen, Yujiu Yang, Minlie Huang, Nan Duan, and Weizhu Chen. Tora: A tool-integrated reasoning agent for mathematical problem solving. In ICLR , 2024. [Gupta and Kembhavi, 2023] Tanmay Gupta and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Visual programming: Compositional visual reasoning without training. In CVPR , 2023. [Hu et al. , 2022] Ziniu Hu, Yichong Xu, Wenhao Yu, Shuo-hang Wang, Ziyi Yang, Chenguang Zhu, Kai-Wei Chang, and Yizhou Sun. Empowering language models with knowledge graph reasoning for open-domain question an-swering. In EMNLP , pages 9562–9581, 2022. [Hu et al. , 2024a] Hanxu Hu, Hongyuan Lu, Huajian Zhang, Yun-Ze Song, Wai Lam, and Yue Zhang. Chain-of-symbol prompting for spatial reasoning in large language models. In COLM , 2024. [Hu et al. , 2024b] Yushi Hu, Weijia Shi, Xingyu Fu, Dan Roth, Mari Ostendorf, Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, and Ranjay Krishna. Visual sketchpad: Sketching as a vi-sual chain of thought for multimodal language models. In 

NeurIPS , 2024. [Jana et al. , 2024] Prithwish Jana, Piyush Jha, Haoyang Ju, Gautham Kishore, Aryan Mahajan, and Vijay Ganesh. Co-tran: An LLM-based code translator using reinforcement learning with feedback from compiler and symbolic exe-cution. In ECAI , pages 4011–4018, 2024. [Jha et al. , 2024] Piyush Jha, Prithwish Jana, Pranavkrishna Suresh, Arnav Arora, and Vijay Ganesh. RLSF: Re-inforcement learning via symbolic feedback. preprint arXiv:2405.16661 , 2024. [Kambhampati et al. , 2024] Subbarao Kambhampati, Karthik Valmeekam, Lin Guan, et al. Position: LLMs can’t plan, but can help planning in LLM-Modulo frameworks. In ICML , pages 22895–22907, 2024. [Kautz, 2022] Henry Kautz. The third AI summer: AAAI robert s. engelmore memorial lecture. AI Magazine ,43(1):105–125, 2022. [Li et al. , 2023] Chengshu Li, Jacky Liang, Andy Zeng, Xinyun Chen, Karol Hausman, Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Li Fei-Fei, Fei Xia, and Brian Ichter. Chain of code: Reasoning with a language model-augmented code emulator. In ICML , pages 28259–28277, 2023. [Li et al. , 2024] Zenan Li, Zhi Zhou, Yuan Yao, Yu-Feng Li, Chun Cao, Fan Yang, Xian Zhang, and Xiaoxing Ma. Neuro-symbolic data generation for math reasoning. In 

NeurIPS , pages 23488–23515, 2024. [Ling et al. , 2023] Zhan Ling, Yunhao Fang, Xuanlin Li, Zhiao Huang, Mingu Lee, Roland Memisevic, and Hao Su. Deductive verification of chain-of-thought reasoning. In NeurIPS , pages 36407–36433, 2023. [Liu et al. , 2023] Bo Liu, Yuqian Jiang, Xiaohan Zhang, Qiang Liu, Shiqi Zhang, Joydeep Biswas, and Peter Stone. LLM+P: Empowering large language models with optimal planning proficiency. preprint arXiv:2304.11477 , 2023. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track 

> 10777

[Lu et al. , 2022] Ximing Lu, Sean Welleck, Peter West, Li-wei Jiang, Jungo Kasai, Daniel Khashabi, Ronan Le Bras, Lianhui Qin, Youngjae Yu, Rowan Zellers, et al. Neuro-logic A* esque decoding: Constrained text generation with lookahead heuristics. In NAACL , pages 780–799, 2022. [Lu et al. , 2024] Pan Lu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Michel Galley, Kai-Wei Chang, Ying Nian Wu, Song-Chun Zhu, and Jianfeng Gao. Chameleon: Plug-and-play composi-tional reasoning with large language models. In NeurIPS ,pages 43447–43478, 2024. [Manhaeve et al. , 2019] Robin Manhaeve, Sebastijan Du-mancic, Angelika Kimmig, Thomas Demeester, and Luc De Raedt. DeepProbLog: Neural probabilistic logic programming. BNAIC , 2019. [Mao et al. , 2019] Jiayuan Mao, Chuang Gan, Pushmeet Kohli, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Jiajun Wu. The neuro-symbolic concept learner: Interpreting scenes, words, and sentences from natural supervision. In ICLR , 2019. [Marra et al. , 2020] Giuseppe Marra, Michelangelo Dili-genti, Francesco Giannini, Marco Gori, and Marco Mag-gini. Relational neural machines. In ECAL , 2020. [Mu et al. , 2024] Tong Mu, Alec Helyar, Johannes Hei-decke, Joshua Achiam, Andrea Vallone, Ian D Kivlichan, Molly Lin, Alex Beutel, John Schulman, and Lilian Weng. Rule based rewards for language model safety. In 

NeurIPS , pages 108877–108901, 2024. [Olausson et al. , 2023] Theo Olausson, Alex Gu, Benjamin Lipkin, Cedegao E. Zhang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Roger Levy. LINC: A neu-rosymbolic approach for logical reasoning by combin-ing language models with first-order logic provers. In 

EMNLP , pages 5153–5176, 2023. [Pallagani et al. , 2022] Vishal Pallagani, Bharath Mup-pasani, Keerthiram Murugesan, et al. Plansformer: Generating symbolic plans using transformers. preprint arXiv:2212.08681 , 2022. [Pan et al. , 2023] Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Logic-LM: Empowering large language models with symbolic solvers for faithful logical reasoning. In EMNLP , pages 3806–3824, 2023. [Poesia et al. , 2024] Gabriel Poesia, Kanishk Gandhi, Eric Zelikman, and Noah D. Goodman. Certified deductive rea-soning with language models. TMLR , 2024. [Premsri and Kordjamshidi, 2025] Tanawan Premsri and Parisa Kordjamshidi. Neuro-Symbolic Training for Reasoning over Spatial Language. In NAACL , 2025. [Qi et al. , 2025] Chengwen Qi, Ren Ma, Bowen Li, He Du, Binyuan Hui, Jinwang Wu, Yuanjun Laili, and Conghui He. Large language models meet symbolic provers for logical reasoning evaluation. In ICLR , 2025. [Shao et al. , 2024] Jie-Jing Shao, Xiao-Wen Yang, Bo-Wen Zhang, Baizhi Chen, Wen-Da Wei, Lan-Zhe Guo, and Yu-feng Li. ChinaTravel: A real-world benchmark for language agents in chinese travel planning. preprint arXiv:2412.13682 , 2024. [Shou et al. , 2022] Ziyi Shou, Yuxin Jiang, and Fangzhen Lin. AMR-DA: Data augmentation by abstract meaning representation. In ACL Findings , pages 3082–3098, 2022. [Silver et al. , 2016] David Silver, Aja Huang, Chris J Mad-dison, Arthur Guez, et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree search. Nature ,529(7587):484–489, 2016. [Su et al. , 2025] DiJia Su, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Michael Rabbat, Yuandong Tian, and Qinqing Zheng. Dualformer: Controllable fast and slow thinking by learning with ran-domized reasoning traces. In ICLR , 2025. [Sur´ ıs et al. , 2023] D´ ıdac Sur´ ıs, Sachit Menon, and Carl Vondrick. ViperGPT: Visual inference via Python execu-tion for reasoning. In CVPR , pages 11888–11898, 2023. [Taddeo and Floridi, 2005] Mariarosaria Taddeo and Lu-ciano Floridi. Solving the symbol grounding problem: a critical review of fifteen years of research. JETAI ,17(4):419–445, 2005. [Trinh et al. , 2024] Trieu H Trinh, Yuhuai Wu, Quoc V Le, He He, and Thang Luong. Solving Olympiad Geometry without Human Demonstrations. Nature , 625(7995):476– 482, 2024. [ ¨ Unsal et al. , 2024] Mert ¨Unsal, Timon Gehr, and Martin Vechev. Alphaintegrator: Transformer action search for symbolic integration proofs. preprint arXiv:2410.02666 ,2024. [Weir et al. , 2024] Nathaniel Weir, Muhammad Khalifa, Linlu Qiu, Orion Weller, and Peter Clark. Learning to reason via program generation, emulation, and search. In 

NeurIPS , 2024. [Weng et al. , 2024] Yixuan Weng, Minjun Zhu, Fei Xia, Bin Li, Shizhu He, Kang Liu, and Jun Zhao. Mastering sym-bolic operations: Augmenting language models with com-piled neural networks. In ICLR , 2024. [Xu et al. , 2018] Jingyi Xu, Zilu Zhang, Tal Friedman, Yitao Liang, and Guy Broeck. A semantic loss function for deep learning with symbolic knowledge. In ICML , 2018. [Yang et al. , 2022] Mengjiao Sherry Yang, Dale Schuur-mans, Pieter Abbeel, and Ofir Nachum. Chain of thought imitation with procedure cloning. In NeurIPS , 2022. [Zhang et al. , 2024] Yu Zhang, Hui-Ling Zhen, Zehua Pei, Yingzhao Lian, Lihao Yin, Mingxuan Yuan, and Bei Yu. Dila: Enhancing LLM tool learning with differential logic layer. preprint arXiv:2402.11903 , 2024. [Zhou et al. , 2025] Zhi Zhou, Kun-Yang Yu, Shi-Yu Tian, Jiang-Xin Shi, Xiao-Wen Yang, Pengxiao Song, Yi-Xuan Jin, Lan-Zhe Guo, and Yu-Feng Li. LawGPT: Knowledge-guided data generation and its application to legal LLM. 

preprint arXiv:2502.06572 , 2025. [Zhou, 2019] Zhi-Hua Zhou. Abductive learning: Towards bridging machine learning and logical reasoning. SCIS ,62(7):76101, 2019. [Zhu et al. , 2024] Tinghui Zhu, Kai Zhang, Jian Xie, and Yu Su. Deductive beam search: Decoding deducible ra-tionale for chain-of-thought reasoning. In COLM , 2024. Proceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI-25) Survey Track