Title: Evaluating the Safety of Deep Learning-Based Brain MRI Reconstruction

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.28714v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 00:05:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Evaluating the Safety of Deep Learning-Based Brain MRI Reconstruction: A Systematic Review of Current Evaluation Practices 

Dat Tat Mai, Thai Viet Pham, Thu Nguyen Thi Dang, and James Jin Kang 

Abstract —Objective: Deep learning accelerates brain MRI four- to tenfold, but learned models can erase a lesion or invent tissue, and pixel-averaged scores such as PSNR and SSIM miss both. We review whether evaluation practice could detect this blind spot. Methods: Following PRISMA 2020 we searched seven databases without date limit, included 263 studies (1995–2026), appraised them with QUADAS-2 and matched instruments, and synthesised narratively. Categories came from titles, abstracts and controlled vocabulary; every prevalence figure is a floor. Duplicate screening achieved substantial agreement (Fleiss’ κ =0.877 ); appraisal agreement was substantial ( 0.788 ; 0.390 where observable); extraction is unaudited. Results: Only 18 of 263 studies (6.8%) record a fidelity metric and a reader assessment on the same data, leaving the field’s central proxy unmeasured. Reader studies mostly measure reader-versus-reader agreement, which is weak: fastMRI 2020 concordance was 0.457 and 0.386 

(Kendall’s W), improving only where SSIM had diverged. Erasing a 100 mm 3 lacunar infarct moves global PSNR about 0.03 

dB under the stated error model. The corpus grew fivefold; reader assessment fell from 32% to 18%, recovering to 21%. Among the four largest families the most hallucination-associated (generative, 39%) is among the least reader-evaluated (11.3%); self-supervised is higher still (47%) with no readers. One study in twenty both releases code and runs readers; none evaluated a model observer; no named dataset covers acute stroke or haemorrhage. Conclusions: On these floors, evaluation practice cannot certify diagnostic safety. We derive five requirements safety-oriented evaluation must meet. 

Index Terms —Deep learning, brain MRI reconstruction, re-construction safety, hallucination, image quality assessment, sys-tematic review. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Brain MRI is widely used because it can clearly distinguish different types of brain tissue and reveal subtle abnormalities that are difficult to detect with other imaging modalities. However, this image quality comes at the cost of long ac-quisition times. Unlike conventional imaging methods that capture an image more directly, MRI builds an image from 

Dat Tat Mai and James Jin Kang are with the School of Science, Engineer-ing & Technology, RMIT University Vietnam, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam (e-mail: dat.mai2@rmit.edu.vn; james.kang@rmit.edu.vn). Thai Viet Pham is with the School of Computing Technologies, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: s4229249@student.rmit.edu.au). Thu Nguyen Thi Dang is with the School of Health and Biomedi-cal Science, RMIT University, Melbourne, VIC 3000, Australia (e-mail: S4205224@student.rmit.edu.au). Corresponding author: Dat Tat Mai. 

a sequence of raw signal measurements (samples of spatial frequencies, known as k-space) collected over time. This prolonged acquisition reduces patient throughput and increases sensitivity to patient motion, which can introduce artifacts and degrade image quality [1]. To address these limitations, acceleration techniques such as parallel imaging, including Sensitivity Encoding (SENSE) [2], and compressed sensing [3] were developed to reduce the amount of data that must be collected. More recently, deep learning has enabled further acceleration by reconstructing high-quality images from in-complete MRI measurements, through cascaded convolutional networks [4], model-based unrolled networks [5, 6], generative adversarial networks [7], and score-based diffusion models [8], at accelerations from fourfold to, in exploratory work, an order of magnitude [9]. The reconstructed images look convincing, and that is the problem. Small changes in the input can produce large errors in the output [10, 11]. Four failure types recur across the studies we reviewed: strong priors smooth away faint structure; motion causes ghosting the model never saw in training [12]; a change of scanner or sampling degrades results in ways that in-distribution testing misses [13]; and generative models can invent plausible tissue [14]. The scores used to certify these methods, peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and structural similarity (SSIM) [15], agree only partially with radiologist quality judgement even on conventional image degradations [16]; and SNR, though reproducible across observers, tracks no-reference quality models only moderately [17], so an image can score well while the error that matters goes unrecorded. We call this the metric blind spot : standard image-quality metrics cannot catch these small but clinically serious errors, because a lesion of a few cubic millimetres barely moves an average taken over millions of voxels. Parts of the field have responded, training quality metrics on radiologist rankings [18], attaching uncertainty maps to reconstructions [19], or running reader studies that test an accelerated protocol against a reference one directly [9, 20]. Causal and counterfactual methods can ask the most direct question, whether a lesion survives a controlled change of acquisition, but have mostly been applied to classification rather than reconstruction [21, 22]. These responses share a root cause. Acceleration works because a learned prior fills in information the measurement does not contain, and that same filled-in information can hide a real finding or create a false arXiv:2608.28714v1 [eess.IV] 28 Aug 2026 2

one, while the field certifies the result with averaged pixel scores that cannot see either event. To our knowledge no systematic review has assembled the evidence on this problem. Existing surveys cover architectures and benchmark performance [23, 24]; none asks how often conventional metrics miss clinically important errors, why they miss them, or what evaluation would have to look like to catch them. We address that through three questions: 

RQ1 How reliably do conventional fidelity metrics track radiologist diagnostic ratings in deep learning-based accelerated brain MRI, and how wide is the evaluation reporting gap in the literature? 

RQ2 What underlying mathematical mechanisms cause stan-dard metrics to overlook localized pathology erasure and generative hallucinations in deep learning-based reconstruction? 

RQ3 What can each evaluation paradigm in current use establish about prior-induced diagnostic error in deep learning-based MRI reconstruction, and what require-ments for safety-oriented evaluation follow from those limits? 

We contribute: (C1) a synthesis of what 263 primary studies report about agreement between pixel-wise metrics and radi-ologist judgement; (C2) four mathematical mechanisms that explain the divergence, with an exact identity bounding the PSNR cost of erasing a lesion; (C3) an analysis of where the evaluation gap comes from, showing that it co-occurs with a division of evaluation practice between research communities and with a benchmark infrastructure lacking acute pathology; and (C4) five requirements that safety-oriented evaluation must meet. The auditing framework these requirements motivate is developed and evaluated in a companion methods paper, not here. Three boundaries should be stated at the outset, because they determine what the findings can and cannot be asked to support. First, this is a review of evaluation practice , not of reconstruction performance: we count what studies measured, not how well their methods performed, and nothing here estimates how often a deployed reconstruction actually erases a lesion. Second, the mechanisms in RQ2 are mathematical properties of the metrics, derived under a stated error model; they establish that a focal error can pass unrecorded, not that it commonly does. Third, prevalence counts rest on labels extracted from what studies report, so every one of them is a lower bound on practice rather than an estimate of it, and we treat the direction of that bias explicitly in Section V-B. The contribution is a diagnosis of what the field’s current instruments are capable of detecting, which is logically prior to, and considerably cheaper to establish than, a measurement of how often they fail. II. R ELATED WORK 

Four strands bear on this review, and the claim that none of them has assembled the evidence we assemble here is a claim about each in turn. 

Surveys of reconstruction methods. Reviews of deep learn-ing MRI reconstruction catalogue architectures, acceleration factors and benchmark accuracy [23–26]. They are organised by method, and their outcome variable is reconstruction fi-delity against a fully sampled reference. Safety and failure modes appear as caveats in discussion sections rather than as an object of synthesis, and none of them tabulates what evaluation each primary study actually performed, which is the quantity this review extracts. 

Task-based image quality assessment. The tradition that ought to have supplied the answer established, decades before deep learning, that image quality is meaningful only relative to a diagnostic task. Barrett and colleagues formalised the observer as part of the measurement: an image is good if an ob-server performing a specified task on it achieves a high figure of merit, typically the area under an ROC curve for a detection task, and the mathematical (ideal or channelised Hotelling) observer supplies a computable surrogate for the human when the task and image statistics are specified [27, 28]. ICRU Report 54 made the same argument the international reference framework for assessing medical imaging quality [29]. That framework already contains the concept the reconstruction literature lacks: a detectability index for a specified lesion, which is by construction sensitive to exactly the focal change a whole-volume L2 score averages away. It has been carried into the dose- and protocol-optimisation literatures of other imaging modalities, but it has not crossed into deep learning MRI reconstruction: no study in this corpus evaluated a model observer, and our first requirement (R1, Section IV-G) is in substance a restatement of the task-based position for a field that has not adopted it. The reason it has not is worth naming: model observers require a specified signal and a statistical description of the background, and the null-space structure that makes learned reconstruction dangerous is precisely what makes those two ingredients hard to specify. 

Failure-mode-specific work. Artifact detection, motion cor-rection and robustness under distribution shift are each ad-dressed in depth, but in isolation, by literatures that do not share an evaluation vocabulary [12, 13, 30]. Analyses of hal-lucination in tomographic reconstruction establish that prior-induced structure lives in the null space of the forward opera-tor, so it is invisible to any measurement-space consistency check [11, 31], and causal and counterfactual methods for medical imaging supply the machinery to intervene on image content and ask whether a finding survives [21, 22, 32, 33]. Neither line has been connected to review-level evidence on how reconstruction is evaluated in practice. 

What is new in the four mechanisms of RQ2, and what is not. Because Section IV states four mechanisms formally, their provenance should be set out plainly rather than left for a reader to reconstruct. Two are elementary properties of the objective rather than findings: spatial error averaging follows from the definition of a mean over the image volume, and loss symmetry from the fact that squaring discards the sign of the residual. Two are established results we restate: reference dependence is standard in the image-quality literature, and the null-space account underlying the realism–reward trade-off is due to Bhadra et al. [31] and Gottschling et al. [11]. What this review adds is not the mechanisms but their quantification and their assembly: the identity at Equation (2), which converts 3

any lesion volume into the PSNR movement its erasure would cause, and the setting of all four against what a corpus of 263 studies is recorded as measuring. We claim the assembly and the bound, not the underlying results. 

Benchmark and annotation infrastructure. The raw k-space resource the field benchmarks on is fastMRI [34], whose brain release followed the knee data described in that report, and an annotation layer is emerging on top of it: fastMRI+ adds expert pathology labels to the fastMRI brain and knee data [35], and curated stroke-lesion datasets exist for segmentation (ISLES [36], ATLAS [37]). None of these supplies raw k-space paired with acute vascular pathology, which is the combination reconstruction evaluation needs, and Section IV-E shows that this is not an incidental gap but the binding constraint on the whole evaluation problem. What no strand supplies is the join: a systematic account of how often the field measures metric–reader agreement, why the metrics fail when it does not, and what each evaluation paradigm can therefore establish. The four strands are not merely separate; they are held apart by what each can access. The survey and hallucination-analysis literatures work on datasets with raw k-space and no clinically verified pathology; the task-based tradition needs a specified signal and a labelled task, which those datasets do not carry; and the clinical reader literature has the pathology and the readers but no access to the raw data on which the mechanisms operate. Section IV-E shows this is not an abstraction but a measurable division in the corpus itself. Supplementary Table S4 sets out each secondary study we identified against the questions asked here. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

This systematic review was conducted in accordance with the PRISMA 2020 statement [38]; the completed checklist, search vocabulary, extraction schema, and analysis scripts are available in the supplementary material and on the Open Science Framework (https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/ 832Z6; timestamped deposit https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/ EUXA8). 

Protocol and registration status. The protocol, covering the research questions, eligibility criteria, search strategy, screen-ing procedure, classification rubric and synthesis approach, was fixed in the project repository before screening began. In the terms of PRISMA 2020 item 24a, this review was not prospectively registered and carries no registration number : PROSPERO’s scope excludes reviews without di-rect clinical health outcomes, and no equivalent prospective registry covers methodological reviews of this kind. The Open Science Framework deposit cited above therefore timestamps the record but is retrospective, and we make no claim of prospective registration on it. Two consequences follow. An external record does not exclude undisclosed post-hoc analytic choices; and the two analyses we ourselves identify as post-hoc (the acceleration-factor extraction of Table VIII and the venue classification of Section IV-E) are labelled as such wherever they appear. 

Search strategy. Seven bibliographic databases (PubMed/MEDLINE, IEEE Xplore, Scopus, Web of Science, SpringerLink, OpenAlex, and Semantic Scholar) were searched between 23 and 24 July 2026, with no publication-date limit applied; the 1995–2026 span quoted elsewhere in this article is the publication range of the studies that were included, not a restriction imposed on the search. Queries were executed through each database’s API rather than its web interface, so the complete Boolean match set was retrieved for every term combination rather than a ranked sample, explaining why the initial identification count is large. The strategy combined three required concept groups: neuroimaging (Block B1), reconstruction and acceleration (Block B2), and safety, failure modes, and evaluation outcomes (Block B3), with MeSH headings and wildcard truncation adapted per database (Supplementary Table S5). Table I details the executed query structure and hit breakdown across databases. The breadth of this search is by design. Evidence of re-construction failure is rarely a paper’s stated subject: artifacts, hallucinations and metric–reader disagreements are most often reported in passing inside studies whose declared contribution is a new architecture, so a query tuned narrowly to safety vocabulary would miss much of this evidence. Clinical and en-gineering literatures also use distinct vocabularies (sequences and artifacts against inverse problems, unrolled optimization and generative priors), and neither database family indexes the other completely. We therefore tuned for sensitivity rather than precision and accepted the screening burden. The funnel from 

27 ,327 records to 263 studies is the intended signature of that choice: the burden falls on initial screening, which reviewers can absorb, rather than on coverage, which no downstream step could recover. 

Eligibility and selection. Records were managed in the review’s own Python pipeline rather than a commercial screen-ing platform; the scripts, the per-record decision files and the per-database query logs are released, so each step below is re-executable. Deduplication by exact identifier matching (PMID/DOI) and string/TF-IDF similarity (Jaro-Winkler ≥

0.97 , cosine ≥ 0.95 ) removed 403 duplicates ( 1.47% ), leaving 

26 ,924 unique records. That rate is low enough to suggest a matching failure but is structural: PubMed’s MeSH arm returned 24 ,693 records and the six engineering arms 2,634 

between them, and sets that barely overlap leave little to deduplicate. This is not a claim of completeness, and one failure is on record: peer review identified an arXiv preprint and its journal version that both survived to the included set, carrying different DOIs, no shared PMID, and titles differing by terminal punctuation, which was below the thresholds above. It was removed at revision, taking the corpus from 264 

reports to 263 studies (Section IV). Automated matching will not catch a preprint–journal pair whose metadata diverges in this way, and the honest inference is that a residual duplicate rate of the same order cannot be excluded. Three reviewers (D.T.M., T.V.P., T.N.T.D.) screened records against the pre-specified PICOS criteria (Table II) at both stages, under a primary-screen-plus- adjudication design: each record received one primary label of include , exclude , flagged 

or background only , and every record labelled flagged went to a second reviewer for adjudication. Labelling was deliberately 4                                                                                                                                 

> TABLE I QUERY STRUCTURE EXECUTED IN EACH DATABASE AND RECORD HIT BREAKDOWN .
> Database Executed Query Structure Controlled Vocabulary Fields Searched Hits ( N)
> PubMed / MEDLINE (B1 ft [TIAB] OR B1 mesh )AND (B2 ft [TIAB] OR B2 mesh )AND (B3 ft [TIAB] OR B3 mesh )NOT (X[TIAB])
> Yes : 9 MeSH headings OR-ed into the three blocks Title/Abstract +MeSH 24 ,693
> SpringerLink (B1) AND (B2) AND (B3) NOT (X) ; quoted phrases, no truncation operators No Full record 1,598
> IEEE Xplore (B1) AND (B2) AND (B3) NOT (X) ; wildcard truncation retained No Metadata 778
> Scopus TITLE-ABS-KEY(B1) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(B2) AND TITLE-ABS-KEY(B3) AND NOT TITLE-ABS-KEY(X)
> No TITLE-ABS-KEY 127
> Semantic Scholar (B1) +(B2) +(B3) , where |denotes OR and +
> denotes AND No Title/Abstract 66
> OpenAlex title_and_abstract.search:B1, title_and_abstract.search:B2, title_and_abstract.search:B3
> No Title/Abstract 34 ∗
> Web of Science TS=(B1) AND TS=(B2) AND TS=(B3) NOT TS=(X)
> No Topic ( TS )31
> Total identified records 27 ,327
> Concept blocks combine as (B1) AND (B2) AND (B3) NOT (X) .B1 neuroimaging: "brain MRI" ,"cerebral MRI" ,
> neuroimag* ,DWI ,FLAIR ,T1w ,T2w ,SWI ; MeSH Brain ,Magnetic Resonance Imaging ,Neuroimaging .B2 AI and accelerated reconstruction: "MRI reconstruction" ,"accelerated MRI" ,"undersampled reconstruction" ,"k-space reconstruction" ,"unrolled network" ,GAN ,"diffusion prior" ; MeSH Deep Learning ,Machine Learning .B3 safety, artifacts and evaluation: hallucinat* ,"lesion suppression" ,reconstruction artifact* ,PSNR ,SSIM ,"reader study" ; MeSH Artifacts ,Diagnostic Errors ,Reproducibility of Results .Xexclusion: "animal model" ,"case report" ,"in vitro" .*denotes truncation. Complete term lists, MeSH headings and per-database syntax are given in Supplementary Table S5. Searches were executed between 2026-07-23 and 2026-07-24, with no publication-date limit. ∗OpenAlex returned 50 raw hits; 34 passed record-completeness filtering.

conservative, so any record with an unclear PICOS dimension, or whose text we could not obtain, was flagged rather than excluded. Title and abstract screening advanced 1,149 records to full-text assessment, of which 109 were labelled include 

on the abstract alone and 1,040 flagged ; both labels carried the record forward, and the distinction records only whether the abstract was sufficient to decide. A further 25 ,573 were excluded and 202 set aside as background. Full texts were pur-sued through institutional and title-level library subscriptions, open-access repositories, preprint servers, PubMed Central and inter-library request until no route remained: 1,068 of the 

1,149 (93 .0% ) were obtained and assessed, and the 81 that could not be obtained are broken down by recorded reason with the selection results (Section IV). The three reviewers divided the 1,068 obtained reports be-tween them under the same primary-screen-plus-adjudication design used at title and abstract: each report received one primary full-text label, and a report was escalated to a second reviewer wherever the primary label was flagged , wherever an inclusion decision rested on a borderline PICOS dimension, or wherever the reviewer requested a second reading. Escalated reports were resolved by consensus discussion between the two assessors, with the third reviewer consulted where the two did not converge. The escalation volumes this produced are reported below, and the per-report labels, escalation marks and reasons are released in the decision ledger. We state the design in this form because it determines what can be computed from the ledger: one primary label per report means no chance-corrected inter-rater coefficient is recoverable from full-text screening, which is why the separate criterion-reproducibility exercise below was run. In total, 263 primary studies met all inclusion criteria upon full-text verification (two additional reports were excluded as duplicate publications). Full-text ex-clusions ( n = 785 ) were categorized by pre-specified PICOS criteria: wrong intervention ( n = 326 ), out of scope ( n = 256 ), wrong outcome ( n = 98 ), wrong population ( n = 93 ), wrong study design ( n = 4 ), non-English ( n = 1 ), and non-primary articles ( n = 7 ). A further 18 reports were retained as background material rather than as included studies, so the 

1,068 assessed reports resolve as 263 included, 785 excluded on PICOS grounds, 2 excluded as duplicate publications and 

18 retained as background. The complete decision ledger is released as fulltext_screening_decisions.csv .

Publication year. Every analysis partitioning the corpus by time uses the year of the version of record as indexed by the publisher (the issue year for journal articles, the proceedings year for conference papers) rather than first online posting or preprint deposit. The rule matters at era boundaries, and we adopt the indexed year because it is what a reader can verify from the reference list, Crossref and PubMed without online-first metadata, which is unevenly available across the 87 

venues represented. The same value is recorded in the year 

field of every bibliography entry and in the publication_-year column of included_characteristics.csv , so the era counts in Table XI are recomputable from either. One consequence should not be read as an inconsistency: 5

the searches ran on 23–24 July 2026, yet 41 of the 263 

included studies ( 15 .6% ) carry a 2026 issue year, being articles published online ahead of print before the searches ran but assigned by the publisher to a 2026 issue. 

Screening agreement, and what it does and does not cover. 

The primary screen described above records one label per record, so no chance-corrected coefficient is recomputable from those decisions alone. We therefore ran a separate duplicate-screening exercise. A random sample of 214 records already assessed at title and abstract was re-screened inde-pendently by all three reviewers, blind both to the recorded decision and to one another. Reviewers judged the four PICOS dimensions from title, journal and abstract, opening the DOI link only where the abstract was insufficient, and returned one of three labels per record: include, exclude or unsure. The sample was drawn without stratification; the drawn records, the three label sets and the agreement computation are released, so the sample is auditable record by record. All 642 cells were completed and no record was dropped for missingness. Across all 214 records Fleiss’ κ = 0 .877 (95% bootstrap CI 0.823 –0.925 ; 10 ,000 resamples, seed 20260821 ), with observed agreement ¯P = 0 .933 against ¯Pe = 0 .455 expected by chance. The three reviewers agreed unanimously on 194 of 

214 records ( 90 .7% ), and pairwise Cohen’s κ ran from 0.845 

to 0.931 . One sensitivity analysis is worth reporting because it is the one a reader is most likely to run. Restricting to the 193 

records on which no reviewer recorded unsure raises Fleiss’ 

κ to 0.943 (95% CI 0.900 –0.979 ). That complete-case figure discards 21 records, and it discards precisely the records at least one reviewer could not decide, so it overstates agreement on the population the coefficient is meant to describe. We report 0.877 as the estimate and 0.943 only as the value obtained when the hard cases are removed. Two qualifications travel with that figure and should not be dropped. First, it measures agreement on the screening decision, not on the extraction labels from which every prevalence count in this article is derived; those remain unaudited for reliability, and the only error rate we can quote for them is the measured 

4/61 (6.6% ) on the design field (Section V-B). Second, the conservative labelling policy routed almost the whole full-text workload to adjudication in any case ( 1,040 of the 1,149 

records advanced at title and abstract were flagged rather than included outright), so a high coefficient is evidence that the criteria were applied consistently, not that the borderline records were easy to classify. What the primary decision records themselves support, and what we therefore also report, are the escalation volumes that policy produced. At full text, 84 reports were escalated to a second reviewer for adjudication and 29 of those were included; a further 77 reports carry a mandatory human-re-inspection mark in the released files, of which 40 were included after that review. Screening recall is bounded by the search strategy and by the criteria as applied rather than esti-mated against an independent reference set of known-eligible records, since no such set exists for this question; Section V-B treats both points as limitations. The duplicate-screened sam-ple, both label sets and the agreement computation are released as kappa_human_results.csv , alongside the full deci-sion ledger in fulltext_screening_decisions.csv .

Data extraction. Reviewers extracted study characteris-tics using the pre-specified form (Supplementary Table S6), capturing method family, reported failure modes, evaluation paradigm, field strength, pulse sequence, reference standard and reproducibility indicators, with a verbatim supporting quotation for every assigned value. Method, failure-mode and evaluation categories were assigned from each record’s title, abstract and controlled vocabulary against the vocabulary fixed in advance (Supplementary Table S5); that deliberately con-servative scope is why every prevalence count here is a lower bound rather than an exhaustive tally. Field strength and pulse sequence, typically stated only in acquisition subsections, were additionally taken from full text where available. We did not contact investigators: a variable not stated in the source was recorded as not reported and never inferred, which is why the 

54 studies without a stated field strength divide into 50 whose full text does not state it and 4 assessed on abstract or partial text. 

Quality appraisal, and the reader/algorithmic partition. 

Methodological quality was evaluated with three design-matched instruments: QUADAS-2 [39] across its four do-mains for diagnostic accuracy and radiologist reader studies; a reporting-transparency check against STARD principles [40], reported descriptively rather than scored, since STARD yields no risk-of-bias rating; and, for algorithmic benchmarking studies, a reproducibility and robustness appraisal covering code and data availability, use of a named public benchmark, whether the reference standard was a fully sampled acqui-sition, and whether robustness to acquisition or distribution shift was reported. ROBINS-I [41] was not applied, since few included studies are the non-randomised interventional designs it was built for. The partition between the two instruments is not the one the extraction labels originally implied, and the correction matters for every reader-share statistic here. Extraction recorded 61 

studies as observer or reader designs; three-reviewer appraisal of their full text found four containing no human reader at all, each using the language of observer evaluation for an automated surrogate. Those four were reclassified as al-gorithmic, so the verified reader subset is 57 and the algorithmic set is 206 , and 57 + 206 = 263 closes the corpus exactly. All 57 were appraised by all three reviewers across two rounds, 39 in the first and 18 in the second, so every QUADAS-2 tally rests on 57 studies and 57 ×7 = 399 domain judgements. Every reader-derived count in this article uses 

57 , and the released per-study file encodes the same partition with the reclassification recorded per study. One further study (S001) carries an appraisal note that a human reader could not be confirmed , only abstract-level text being available; it is retained in the reader subset, since non-ascertainment is not a finding of absence, and it is flagged in the deposit. 

Appraisal agreement. The three reviewers rated every ap-plicable domain Low, Unclear or High independently, each judgement carrying a verbatim supporting quotation, before joint review to harmonize thresholds. Five first-round studies were later re-appraised on recovered full text (below), so their 

35 judgements no longer rest on three independent ratings 6           

> TABLE II PICOS ELEMENTS AND THEIR APPLICATION IN THIS REVIEW .
> Element Definition Application in this Review
> Population Target imaging modalities, clinical domains, and scanner physics Human brain MRI acquisitions (acute ischemic stroke, neurovascular lesions, intracranial haemorrhages, tumours, and structural T1w, T2w, FLAIR, DWI scans across 1.5T, 3T, and 7T field strengths). Intervention AI-based and accelerated reconstruction methods, and their safety/fidelity evaluation Deep learning and accelerated reconstruction methods (unrolled physics-based networks, GANs, diffusion priors, self-supervised, denoising, super-resolution), together with methods for evaluating their fidelity, artifacts, robustness, or failure modes. Comparison Baseline metrics, observers, and reference standards Conventional pixel-wise metrics (PSNR, SSIM, NRMSE), perceptual/learned metrics (LPIPS, FID), model observers, fully sampled reference images, or radiologist reader assessments. Outcome Reconstruction quality, fidelity, and failure characterization Image-quality/fidelity measures, artifact and failure-mode characterization, metric–radiologist agreement, uncertainty estimates, robustness to distribution shift, and diagnostic/observer outcomes. Study Design Methodological criteria and empirical validation settings Primary empirical studies, algorithmic benchmarking, counterfactual interventional stress-testing, and human or model observer evaluations.

and are excluded from the coefficient. Over the remaining 

52 studies and 364 judgements Fleiss’ κ = 0.788 (95% bootstrap CI 0.739 –0.833 ; 10 ,000 resamples, seed 20260821 ). That figure averages two rounds that behaved differently, and the difference is more informative than the average. The 34 

first-round studies retaining three independent ratings were unanimous on all 238 of their judgements, so they contribute 

κ = 1 .00 by construction and carry no information about latent reliability. The 18 of the second round were unanimous on 

60 of 126 (47 .6% ), and across those 126 Fleiss’ κ = 0 .390 

(95% CI 0.293 –0.484 ), falling in the fair range on the Landis– Koch bands, with an interval reaching into moderate. The procedure was identical across rounds; the subsets were not, the second round comprising studies the first pass deferred as not straightforward. Two readings remain open: that those studies report their methods less completely and are genuinely harder to rate, and that the first round was less independent in practice than in design ; these data do not separate them. The disagreement has a structure worth recording rather than smoothing. Across the 126 second-round judgements one reviewer rated Low 33 .3% of the time and another 61 .9% , a difference of threshold rather than of reading, which is why κ

sits at 0.390 while raw agreement is 63 .5% . Six judgements split three ways with no majority; all six were recorded as 

Unclear , on the ground that a panel unable to converge is itself evidence the report did not support a confident judgement, which is what Unclear encodes in QUADAS-2. The rule was applied to those six and no other case, and the per-reviewer labels are released so a reader can apply a different rule and recompute. Section V-B states what this does and does not establish. Table III summarizes corpus-level quality indicators and the QUADAS-2 domain judgments. 

Derived venue classification. The analysis in Section IV-E groups studies by publication community. That grouping is post-hoc, was not part of the fixed protocol, and is stated in full in Supplementary Table S13 so it can be reproduced or contested. Each study’s journal title, and nothing else about the study, is matched case-insensitively against three ordered keyword lists (engineering and methods, then general neuroscience and neuroimaging, then clinical imaging), with anything unmatched left unclassified rather than forced into a group. The ordering is load-bearing, since titles such as 

Medical Image Analysis would otherwise match two lists, and it is applied identically to all 263 studies. The rule as executed and the resulting per-study assignment are released as 5_Code/venue_classification.py and venue_-community_classification.csv .

Synthesis. Due to heterogeneity in acquisition protocols, reconstruction architectures, datasets, and outcome measures, evidence was synthesised narratively in accordance with SWiM guidelines [42]. Studies were structured around the primary research questions (RQ1–RQ3) and grouped by re-construction method family, field strength, pulse sequence, and failure mode. Quantitative values reflect named primary studies rather than pooled meta-analytic estimates; no effect measure is pooled, and no meta-analytic model is fitted. Percentages are reported to one decimal place and rounded half-up throughout, so 9/80 prints as 11 .3% and not 11 .2% .Sensitivity analysis was performed by recalculating headline prevalence counts on the 258 studies verified against complete full text (Section V-B). IV. R ESULTS 

All counts and prevalence statements in this section describe the 1,068 reports assessed in full and the 263 included studies; because 81 candidate reports remain unretrievable, they are lower bounds on the literature rather than estimates of it. 

A. Selection and corpus 

From 27,327 records identified across seven databases, multi-tier deduplication removed 403 duplicates, leaving 26,924 unique records screened at title and abstract. Of these, 1,149 proceeded to full-text eligibility, and full texts were obtained for 1,068 of them ( 93 .0% ; Section III). Each of the 81 reports still out of reach was checked against its publisher plat-form and assigned a recorded reason: 53 sit behind title-level subscriptions our institution does not hold, across nineteen publishers; 13 are Springer conference chapters sold only per chapter; 4 are ISMRM proceedings abstracts issued without a PDF; 4 resolve to a whole proceedings volume or to front 7

TABLE III CORPUS -LEVEL PROVENANCE AND METHODOLOGICAL QUALITY INDICATORS ACROSS THE 263 INCLUDED STUDIES , WITH QUADAS-2 DOMAIN -WISE RISK OF BIAS AND APPLICABILITY CONCERNS FOR THE FULL APPRAISED DIAGNOSTIC /READER SUBSET (n = 57 , RATED ACROSS SEVEN DOMAINS ;

> INDEPENDENTLY BY ALL THREE REVIEWERS EXCEPT FOR THE FIVE STUDIES RE

-APPRAISED ON RECOVERED FULL TEXT ). T HE 39 STUDIES OF THE FIRST APPRAISAL ROUND AND THE 18 OF THE SECOND ARE POOLED HERE ; THE REMAINING 206 STUDIES WERE APPRAISED ON REPRODUCIBILITY AND ROBUSTNESS INSTEAD (57 + 206 = 263 ). S IX OF THE 399 DOMAIN JUDGEMENTS SPLIT THREE WAYS WITH NO MAJORITY AND ARE RECORDED AS 

Unclear (S ECTION III). 

Indicator / Domain Value / Risk of Bias Breakdown 

Publication period 1995–2026; 229/263 ( 87 .1% ) published in 2020 or later, and 174/263 ( 66 .2% ) in 2023 or later, indicating a predominantly recent evidence base. Basis of assessment, current Full text available for 258/263 ( 98 .1% ); partial or truncated full text for 1/263 ( 0.4% ); title, abstract and MeSH only for 4/263 ( 1.5% ). Basis of assessment, at appraisal The first appraisal round was made on the text obtainable at the time, which for 18/263 studies was abstract and MeSH only (6 of them within the QUADAS-2 subset). A later library sweep recovered full text for 14 of those 18 (including 5 of the 6), and all 14 have since been re-appraised on the recovered full text, so appraisal basis now stands at 257/263 full text, 2/263 partial text and 4/263 abstract and MeSH only (within the QUADAS-2 subset, 56/57 on full text and 1/57 [S001] on abstract-level text). The two rows now differ by a single study (S200), appraised on truncated text whose full version has since become available. Leading venues The eight most frequent of the 87 distinct venue titles represented in the corpus, accounting for 128/263 ( 48 .7% ) of included studies: Magnetic Resonance in Medicine (40), IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (17), AJNR (15), Magnetic Resonance Imaging (14), JMRI (12), Scientific Reports (12), NeuroImage (9), Medical Image Analysis (9). Predominant design Algorithmic / methodological reconstruction studies ( n = 206 ), alongside a verified ob-server/reader subset ( n = 57 ) [9, 20]. Extraction recorded 61 reader designs; appraisal of their full text found 4 with no human reader, and those 4 were reclassified as algorithmic (202 + 4 = 206 ; 61 − 4 = 57 ). Of the 57: 34 are appraised and verified by all three reviewers; 18 were appraised by all three in a second round and await final adjudication of 6 split domain judgements; and 5 (S004, S020, S027, S034, S115) were re-appraised by the reviewers on full text recovered after the first round, with domain judgements verified against the source text. Every reader-derived statistic in this article uses 57. Reference standard Expert reader consensus (70), an unspecified stated ground truth (62), a fully sampled acquisition (69), a conventional or standard-of-care acquisition (15); not stated in 47/263 ( 17 .9% ). Reproducibility Code availability stated in 97/263 ( 36 .9% ); a named public dataset or benchmark used in 109/263 ( 41 .4% ), most commonly fastMRI, HCP, ADNI and IXI. Availability is variable and remains an area for improvement. Sampling and setting Sampling frame not stated in 95/263 ( 36 .1% ); recruitment centre not stated in 174/263 ( 66 .2% ). Ethics approval or informed consent reported in 159/263 ( 60 .5% ). TABLE IV 

(Table III continued.) QUADAS-2 RISK OF BIAS FOR THE APPRAISED READER /DIAGNOSTIC SUBSET (n = 57 ). 

Indicator / Domain Value / Risk of Bias Breakdown QUADAS-2 Risk of Bias ( n = 57 Reader / Diagnostic Accuracy Studies) 

Patient Selection Low: 15/57 ( 26 .3% ); Unclear: 19/57 ( 33 .3% ); High: 23/57 ( 40 .4% ). The weakest domain: sampling is predominantly purposive or pathology-enriched, and most of the appraised studies state no enrolment rule. Index Test (AI Reconstruction) Low: 26/57 ( 45 .6% ); Unclear: 9/57 ( 15 .8% ); High: 22/57 ( 38 .6% ). Low risk falls below half once the second round is included. High ratings arise where readers scored accelerated reconstructions with the reference visible, or where test parameters were set using reference-derived labels. Reference Standard Low: 26/57 ( 45 .6% ); Unclear: 15/57 ( 26 .3% ); High: 16/57 ( 28 .1% ). High ratings arise where no artifact-free reference exists, or where lesion truth is defined by the comparator images themselves (incorporation bias). Reading the recovered full text moved four of the re-appraised studies from Low to High here, each because the comparator images, or software applied to them, supplied the truth against which they were scored. Flow and Timing Low: 45/57 ( 78 .9% ); Unclear: 7/57 ( 12 .3% ); High: 5/57 ( 8.8% ). The strongest domain, since retrospective undersampling of the same raw k-space gives a zero interval between index test and reference. 8                   

> TABLE V
> (Table III continued.) QUADAS-2 APPLICABILITY CONCERNS (n= 57 ), WITH THE POOLED JUDGEMENT COUNTS .
> Indicator / Domain Value / Risk of Bias Breakdown QUADAS-2 Applicability Concerns ( n= 57 )
> Patient Selection Low: 36/57 ( 63 .2% ); Unclear: 4/57 ( 7.0% ); High: 17/57 ( 29 .8% ), chiefly healthy-volunteer, lesion-free, or non-clinical cohorts. Index Test Low: 30/57 ( 52 .6% ); Unclear: 4/57 ( 7.0% ); High: 23/57 ( 40 .4% ), where the evaluated method is image-domain post-processing, cross-field synthesis, harmonization, or a quality index rather than reconstruction from undersampled k-space. Reference Standard Low: 39/57 ( 68 .4% ); Unclear: 3/57 ( 5.3% ); High: 15/57 ( 26 .3% ). Across all 228 risk-of-bias judgements: 112 ( 49 .1% ) Low, 50 ( 21 .9% ) Unclear, 66 ( 28 .9% ) High. Across all 171 applicability judgements: 105 (61 .4% ) Low, 11 ( 6.4% ) Unclear, 55 ( 32 .2% ) High. Over the 364 judgements that rest on three independent ratings Fleiss’ κ= 0 .788 (95% CI
> 0.739 –0.833 ), but agreement is not uniform across the two appraisal rounds: the 238 retained first-round judgements were unanimous, the 126 of the second round reach κ= 0 .390 (95% CI 0.293 –0.484 ); the 35 judgements of the 5 re-appraised studies are excluded, having been conducted subsequently on recovered full text. Section III gives the decomposition and Section V-B what it bounds. The high proportion of Unclear ratings reflects unreported blinding and sampling procedures, compounded by the one first-round study for which only abstract-level text is available. Six second-round judgements split three ways with no majority and are recorded as Unclear under the rule stated in Section III. Per-study ratings, each with the verbatim supporting quotation, are released as included_characteristics_supplement.csv .

matter rather than a single report; and 7 carry no DOI and no locatable source. Supplementary Table S14 gives the per-publisher breakdown. Access difficulty is itself informative, though it bounds the missing evidence rather than character-ising it. Of the 341 assessed reports obtainable only through title-level subscriptions and equivalent barriers, 294 (86 .2% )proved ineligible on the same PICOS criteria, 2 were retained as background and 45 were eligible ( 294 + 2 + 45 = 341 ;the 45 resolve to 44 studies, one being a preprint adjudicated a duplicate). Raw non-retrieval counts therefore overstate the missing evidence by roughly sevenfold. But those 45 were concentrated in subscription clinical journals, and Section IV-E shows they differ systematically from the open literature in exactly the variable this review measures, so 86 .2% is an upper bound on what non-retrieval costs us, not a demonstration that it costs us nothing. Of the 1,068 assessed reports, 787 were excluded (785 on PICOS grounds, 2 as duplicate reports of included studies) and 18 recorded as background, leaving 263 included primary studies spanning 1995–2026 (Fig. 1). Each included study was verified against the fullest text obtainable for it: complete full text for 258, partial text for 1, and title, abstract and controlled vocabulary for 4 (Section III). Their aggregate characteristics are given in Table VI, and their thematic distribution across the research questions is summarized in Supplementary Table S7; all 263 are listed, with full references, in Supplementary Tables S1–S3. Corpus growth is recent: 34 studies appeared in 1995–2019, 55 in 2020–2022 and 174 in 2023–2026. 

B. RQ1: the metric–reader comparison is almost never made, and where readers appear they agree only partially 

Across the 84 studies reporting objective fidelity metrics and the 57 verified reader studies, the comparisons that actually exist show agreement between fidelity metrics and radiologist assessment that is partial and condition-dependent (Table VII). The size of that evidence base should be stated in the text and not left to the table caption: only two of the four rows in Table VII were collected on reconstructions of undersampled k-space. Tang et al. [18] collected radiologist rankings on synthetically corrupted image pairs, and Sommer et al. [12] on clinical scans corrupted by real patient motion rather than by undersampling. The table that carries RQ1 therefore rests on two on-target rows, which is the honest size of the direct evidence for the metric–reader comparison in this setting. In the fastMRI 2020 challenge’s reader phase, six radiologists ranked submissions for quality of pathology depiction; their concordance, by Kendall’s coefficient, was 

0.457 in the 4× track and 0.386 in the 8× track, rising to 

0.781 only in the transfer track, and the organisers report that concordance improved as SSIM scores diverged, which is to say the metric separated methods reliably only where their outputs already differed grossly [43]. When radiologist preference is instead used as the training signal, purpose-built quality networks predict expert rankings at 75 .2% ± 1.3% 

and 79 .2% ± 1.7% , against radiologists’ own interobserver agreement of 61 .5% ± 5.5% ; the same study finds rank-based reading far more reliable than Likert scoring ( 70 .4% versus 

25% agreement between radiologists) [18]. Reader tolerance of acceleration is real but bounded: in a retrospective evaluation spanning accelerations up to 100 ×, 94% of volumes ( 65 of 69 )were rated sufficient for potential screening use at up to 14 ×

(interreader intraclass correlation 0.875 ), with the threshold for full diagnostic quality lower still [9]. The one direct clinical observation of the failure this review is about comes from an emergency-department and inpatient comparison, and it is a single case. Across 66 paired examinations in which a two-minute ultrafast protocol (T1w, T2/T2 ∗, FLAIR and DWI, machine-learning-assisted reconstruction) was read against a ten-minute reference protocol, two blinded neuroradiologists agreed on the main clinical diagnosis in 65 of 66 cases (98 .5% ), rated overall diagnostic quality no different between protocols ( P > . 05 ), preferred the reference protocol for image noise and geometric distortion ( P < . 05 ) and preferred the accelerated protocol for reduced motion artifact ( P < . 01 )[20]. The single discrepant case is the one that matters here: a punctate focus of restricted diffusion, read as possible acute-to-subacute infarct on the reference DWI, was less conspicuous on the accelerated DWI, which the authors attribute to a com-bination of image-quality difference and section positioning, the lesion being smaller than the section thickness ( 4 mm 9

TABLE VI CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 263 INCLUDED STUDIES .                                                                                                                   

> Demographic / Method Dimension Category Breakdown (n)Percentage / Key Methodological Notes Publication Period 1995–2019 n= 34 12 .9% (Classical CS/PI & early CNNs) 2020–2022 n= 55 20 .9% (Unrolled physics & GAN priors) 2023–2026 n= 174 66 .2% (Diffusion priors & 3D/4D foundation models)
> Reconstruction Paradigm
> (multi-label; 339 labels recorded)
> Compressed Sensing / Parallel Imaging n= 93 Iterative sparsity & coil sensitivity encoding Generative (GAN/Diffusion/VAE) n= 80 Adversarial perception & posterior sampling Motion Correction n= 57 Intra-scan motion artifact suppression Physics-based Unrolled n= 37 Explicit k-space data consistency layers Denoising n= 30 Image-domain noise suppression Super-resolution n= 25 Resolution enhancement post-acquisition Self-supervised / Unsupervised n= 17 Training without fully sampled reference scans
> MRI Pulse Sequences
> (multi-label; 490 labels)
> T1-weighted (T1w) n= 163 High-resolution anatomical cortical profiling T2-weighted (T2w) n= 122 Ventricular & CSF pathology assessment FLAIR n= 85 Hyperintense peri-ventricular lesion detection Diffusion-Weighted (DWI) n= 72 Acute ischemic lesion (DWI core) evaluation SWI / T∗
> 2-weighted n= 48 Punctate cerebral microbleed hypointensity voids
> Magnetic Field Strength
> (single-label; predominant field where several are used)
> 3.0 Tesla ( 3T) n= 153 58 .2% (Primary clinical scanner benchmark) 7.0 Tesla ( 7T) n= 35 13 .3% (Ultra-high-field research acquisitions) 1.5 Tesla ( 1.5T) n= 21 8.0% (Routine clinical throughput imaging)
> Not stated n= 50 19 .0% (Full text obtained; no field strength stated)
> Not ascertainable n= 4 1.5% (Only abstract or partial text available)
> Evaluation Paradigm
> (multi-label; 177 labels recorded across 144 studies)
> Pixel-wise (PSNR/SSIM/NRMSE) n= 84 47 .5% of recorded (legacy fidelity reporting) Observer / Reader Studies n= 57 32 .2% of recorded (task-based reader assessment; verified subset) Uncertainty Estimation n= 18 10 .2% of recorded (posterior variance maps) Learned / Perceptual n= 18 10 .2% of recorded (rank-trained metrics)
> Co-reporting. Of the 144 studies with a recorded evaluation paradigm, 28 report more than one. Critically, only 18 studies in the entire corpus ( 6.8% of 263 ;
> 12 .5% of the 144 recorded) report both a pixel-wise fidelity metric and a reader assessment on the same data, which is the minimum precondition for computing metric-versus-reader agreement on which safety claims implicitly depend. See Section IV.

reference against 5 mm accelerated) and so subject to partial-volume contamination. They draw the inference themselves, that the protocol’s sensitivity to small findings is an open question. One case in 66 is not a prevalence estimate and we do not offer it as one. It is a worked instance of the pattern this review predicts: an aggregate quality comparison that finds no difference, and inside it a focal finding that a reader saw and the aggregate did not. Where readers assess artifacts directly, blinded reading detects what reference-based metrics cannot express: a two-neuroradiologist blinded study of 28 clinical scans with real patient motion found significant artifact-score reductions after network correction ( p < . 03 ), a setting in which the motion-corrupted reference invalidates PSNR and SSIM by construction [12]. Motion also interacts with the sampling scheme itself, appearing as ghosting under Cartesian trajectories and as streaking or blurring under radial ones, so the visual form of the same physical corruption differs by protocol [44]. The reference pipeline is not neutral either: conventional SWI homodyne phase filtering has been shown to create punctate artifactual microhaemorrhage-like foci, so processing can manufacture findings as well as remove them [45]. No included study reports a rank correlation between a pixel-wise fidelity metric and radiologist diagnostic assess-ment for deep learning-based brain reconstruction, and none evaluated a model observer. The second statement needs a boundary that the first does not. Our search vocabulary (Ta-ble I, block B3) contains reader-study and metric terms but no model-observer vocabulary, so a study that used a channelised Hotelling or non-prewhitening observer and described it only in those terms could have been missed at retrieval. What we can say is that none of the 263 studies retrieved, screened and extracted here reports one, and that the term does not appear in any extracted evaluation label; whether the true field-wide count is zero or merely very small, it is not a paradigm this corpus can be said to use. That absence is itself the RQ1 finding: only 18 of 263 studies ( 6.8% , a screening-level lower bound; Section III) record a fidelity metric and a reader assessment on the same data, so the field’s central proxy relationship, that high fidelity scores imply diagnostic adequacy, is largely unmeasured rather than merely disputed. Table VIII reports how evaluation practice varies with the acceleration factor actually stated in each study. It is built only from what the corpus records: the acceleration factor was extracted post hoc from the full texts of all 263 included studies with a verbatim supporting quotation for every value, and 63 studies ( 24 .0% ) state one. Studies are grouped by the highest factor at which they evaluate their method. The table deliberately carries no fidelity threshold, reader-score difference or metric–reader rank statistic per acceleration band, because no included study reports one: that absence is the finding of Section IV, not an omission from the table. 

C. RQ2: four mechanisms explain the divergence 

Four mechanisms account for why the metrics miss what the readers see. Table IX states each one formally alongside the clinical failure it permits, and Supplementary Table S8 gives the fuller derivations and evidence sources. 10 

TABLE VII WHAT THE READER STUDIES IN THIS CORPUS ACTUALLY MEASURED ABOUT METRIC –READER AGREEMENT (RQ1). E VERY VALUE IS QUOTED FROM THE NAMED STUDY , WITH THE REPORTED COEFFICIENT AND ITS DEFINITION STATED . N O INCLUDED STUDY REPORTS A METRIC –READER RANK CORRELATION FOR DEEP LEARNING -BASED BRAIN RECONSTRUCTION ; THE ROWS BELOW ARE THE CLOSEST MEASUREMENTS THAT EXIST , AND THE SECOND COLUMN STATES FOR EACH ROW WHAT THE READERS WERE ACTUALLY SHOWN , BECAUSE TWO OF THE FOUR ROWS WERE NOT COLLECTED ON RECONSTRUCTIONS OF UNDERSAMPLED k-SPACE .

Study Readers and design Comparison performed Reported quantity (as defined in the study) 

fastMRI 2020 challenge [43] 6 radiologists ranking submissions for quality of pathology depiction Radiologist concordance across accelerations; SSIM-based ranking vs reader ranking Kendall’s W = 0 .457 (4×), 0.386 

(8×), 0.781 (transfer track); concordance improved as SSIM scores diverged Tang et al. [18] 7 radiologists, rank-based reading; 2 also Likert scoring. 

Rankings were collected on synthetically corrupted image pairs, not on reconstructions of undersampled k-space 

Quality networks trained on radiologist rankings vs MSE/SSIM as optimisation targets Ranking accuracy 75 .2% ± 1.3% 

and 79 .2% ± 1.7% with reference image; radiologist interobserver agreement 61 .5% ± 5.5% ; ranking vs Likert agreement 70 .4% vs 25% 

Radmanesh et al. [9] Retrospective; neuroradiologist scoring of diagnostic quality at accelerations up to 100 ×

Reader-assigned acceleration thresholds for diagnostic and screening quality 

65 /69 volumes ( 94% ) sufficient for potential screening at ≤ 14 ×;interreader ICC 0.875 ; mean absolute interreader difference in threshold acceleration factor 0.7×

(level 1) and 5.4× (level 2) Sommer et al. [12] 2 neuroradiologists, blinded, 28 clinical cases with real motion Artifact severity (5-point scale) before vs after network correction Significant reduction in mean artifact scores ( p < . 03 ); reference-based metrics inapplicable, as the reference itself is motion-corrupted 

TABLE VIII EVALUATION PRACTICE BY THE HIGHEST ACCELERATION FACTOR (R) EACH STUDY REPORTS , AMONG THE 63 OF 263 INCLUDED STUDIES THAT STATE ONE . B ANDS ARE HALF -OPEN , SO A STUDY REPORTING EXACTLY R = 4 FALLS IN THE SECOND BAND AND ONE REPORTING EXACTLY R = 8 IN THE THIRD . C OUNTS ARE STUDIES ; PERCENTAGES ARE WITHIN BAND . Reader , ANY OBSERVER OR READER ASSESSMENT RECORDED ; M+R, A PIXEL -WISE FIDELITY METRIC AND A READER ASSESSMENT RECORDED ON THE SAME DATA ; Halluc. , HALLUCINATION OR FIDELITY INSTABILITY AMONG THE RECORDED FAILURE MODES ; Artifacts , ALIASING , GHOSTING OR GIBBS ARTIFACTS AMONG THEM . A CCELERATION FACTORS WERE EXTRACTED FROM FULL TEXT AFTER THE REGISTERED EXTRACTION ROUND , EACH WITH A VERBATIM SUPPORTING QUOTATION AND EXCLUDING MATCHES INSIDE REFERENCE LISTS AND CITATION CONTEXTS ; THE 407 RETAINED QUOTATIONS COME FROM THE 63 STUDIES THAT STATE A FACTOR , A MEAN OF 6.5

> QUOTATIONS PER SUCH STUDY

, AND ARE RELEASED AS A C C E L E R A T I O N _F A C T O R S _E V I D E N C E .C S V . T HE EXTRACTION IS SCREENING -LEVEL , SO COUNTS ARE LOWER BOUNDS . N O STUDY AT ANY ACCELERATION FACTOR REPORTS A RANK CORRELATION BETWEEN A FIDELITY METRIC AND READER JUDGEMENT .

Acc. ( R) Studies Reader M+R Halluc. Artifacts Sequences most often evaluated 

2 ≤ R < 4 32 7 (21 .9% ) 1 (3.1% ) 7 (21 .9% ) 25 (78 .1% ) T1w 15, T2w 12, FLAIR 11 

4 ≤ R < 8 17 5 (29 .4% ) 1 (5.9% ) 2 (11 .8% ) 12 (70 .6% ) T1w 9, T2w 9, FLAIR 7 

R ≥ 8 14 5 (35 .7% ) 4 (28 .6% ) 2 (14 .3% ) 8 (57 .1% ) T1w 9, T2w 8, FLAIR 8 

All 63 17 (27 .0%) 6 (9.5%) 11 (17 .5%) 45 (71 .4%) T1w 33, T2w 29, FLAIR 26 The R-reporting subset is close to the whole corpus on reader assessment ( 27 .0% against 21 .7% for all 263 ), so it is not a systematically better-evaluated stratum. Reader assessment rises with acceleration ( 21 .9% → 29 .4% → 35 .7% ) and paired metric–reader reporting concentrates in the most accelerated band ( 4/14 against 1/32 in the 2 ≤ R < 4 band), but the counts are small and most studies in every band (including 9 of the 14 with R ≥ 8) report no reader assessment at all. Artifact description is the most frequently recorded failure mode at every acceleration level, whereas hallucination or fidelity instability is recorded in 11 of 63 .11 

Search Arm 1: Biomedical Databases Search Arm 2: Engineering Databases Source: PubMed/MEDLINE Nine MeSH headings OR-ed into concept blocks B1–B3, combined with title and abstract free-text terms Records identified: n=24,693 Sources (6): SpringerLink (1,598), IEEE Xplore (778), Scopus (127), Semantic Scholar (66), OpenAlex (34), Web of Science (31) Records identified: n=2,634 

Records identified across both search arms 

n=27,327 

Duplicate records removed by multi-tier matching (PMID/DOI, Jaro-Winkler title, TF-IDF) 

n=403 

Screening Phase I Title and abstract against PICOS 

n=26,924 

Records excluded during title and abstract screening: n=25,775 

Excluded on PICOS: n=25,573 

Background only: n=202 

Screening Phase II Full-text screening 

n=1,149 

Reports not included at the full-text stage: n=886 

Not retrieved: n=81 

Assessed but excluded: n=787 

(785 on PICOS; 2 duplicate reports) Background only: n=18 Primary studies included in the analytical set: n=263 

Compressed sensing / parallel imaging n=93; generative priors n=80 Motion correction n=57; physics-based unrolled n=37; denoising n=30 Super-resolution n=25; self-supervised n=17 

> (multi-label: 339 method labels across the 263 studies)
> Identification Screening Included

Fig. 1. PRISMA 2020 flow diagram for study selection across the two search arms. Multi-tier deduplication reduced 27 ,327 identified records to 26 ,924 

unique records; title and abstract screening advanced 1,149 candidates. Full texts were obtained for 1,068 of them ( 93 .0% ); 81 could not be retrieved. Following PRISMA 2020, exclusion and background retention are recorded as distinct dispositions: of the 1,068 reports assessed in full, 787 were excluded (785 on explicit PICOS grounds and 2 as duplicate reports of included studies) and a further 18 were retained as background material rather than excluded, leaving 263 primary studies in the analytical set ( 263 + 787 + 18 = 1 ,068 ). TABLE IX THE FOUR MECHANISMS BY WHICH A WHOLE -VOLUME FIDELITY SCORE FAILS TO REGISTER A FOCAL DIAGNOSTIC ERROR (RQ2). T HE THIRD COLUMN NAMES A FAILURE THE MECHANISM PERMITS , NOT ONE THIS REVIEW HAS OBSERVED AT A STATED FREQUENCY ; THE FOURTH STATES WHY THE SCORE DOES NOT MOVE . N UMERICAL ENTRIES ARE COMPUTED FROM EQUATION (2) UNDER THE STATED ERROR MODEL , NOT MEASURED IN ANY PRIMARY STUDY .

Mechanism Formal statement Clinical failure it permits Why the score does not move 

(a) Spatial error averaging 

L2 error is averaged uniformly over all 

H × W × D voxels, so a lesion contributes with weight 

f = Vlesion /V total 

Erasure of an acute lacunar infarct on DWI or FLAIR, or of a punctate microhaemorrhage on SWI or T ∗

> 2

By (2), erasing a 100 mm 3 infarct at 

r = 100 moves global PSNR by 

0.027 –0.036 dB; a 5 mm 3

microhaemorrhage by 1.3–1.8 × 10 −3 dB (b) Reference dependence Every reference-based score presupposes a registered, artifact-free reference image A valid motion-corrected reconstruction is penalised against a corrupted reference, and genuine correction is scored as error The comparison is no longer between reconstruction and truth; PSNR and SSIM become uninterpretable rather than merely noisy (c) Loss symmetry ( ˆXi − Xi)2 = ( Xi − ˆXi)2: the objective is indifferent to the sign of the error A suppressed hyperintense lesion is scored identically to added background noise of the same magnitude Diagnosis is asymmetric where the metric is not: a missed finding and a spurious brightening carry the same penalty (d) Realism–reward trade-off Adversarial and perceptual objectives reward outputs typical of the training distribution, log Dϕ( ˆX), not outputs faithful to the measurement Synthesis of plausible vessels, sulci or texture that was never acquired Perceptual scores can rise as measurement fidelity falls, so the objective pays for the hallucination it should penalise 12 

Spatial averaging. Conventional L2 metrics average residual error uniformly over all H × W × D voxels, so the total decomposes over lesion and background regions: MSE ( ˆX, X ) = Vlesion 

Vtotal 

MSE lesion 

+



1 − Vlesion 

Vtotal 



MSE bg .

(1) With lesion volume fraction f = Vlesion /V total and local error ratio r = MSE lesion /MSE bg , the global PSNR change caused by a localized edit follows directly: 

|∆PSNR | = 10 log 10 (1 + f (r − 1)) (dB ). (2) The consequence is quantitative rather than rhetorical, and it is worth anchoring on a lesion a neuroradiologist would expect to resolve rather than on the smallest arithmetically convenient one. An acute lacunar infarct of 100 mm 3 is a sphere 5.8 mm across: on a clinical DWI acquired at 4–

5 mm section thickness [20] that is several voxels wide in-plane and spans one to two sections, so it is resolved, if only just, in the through-plane direction. It occupies a volume fraction f = 6.3–8.3 × 10 −5 of a 1.2–1.6 L brain. Even at a hundredfold local error ratio ( r = 100 ), Equation (2) gives |∆PSNR | = 0 .027 –0.036 dB. Erasing a resolvable acute infarct outright therefore moves global PSNR by about three hundredths of a decibel, which is the same order as the third decimal place of a score conventionally reported to two. The limiting case is worth stating precisely, because it is easy to state loosely. A punctate cerebral microhaemorrhage of 5 mm 3 is 2.1 mm across. It is not resolved on clinical DWI, whose voxels are roughly 12 –20 mm 3, so no reconstruction can be said to erase it there; it is not resolved in the first place. It is several voxels across on the high-resolution SWI or T ∗ 

> 2

-weighted acquisition on which microhaemorrhages are actually read, and on that sequence its erasure costs f = 3 .1–

4.2 × 10 −6 and |∆PSNR | = 1 .3–1.8 × 10 −3 dB, below the precision at which the score is reported at all. Scaling in the other direction, a 500 mm 3 cortical infarct costs ≈ 0.15 dB (0.13 –0.18 dB across the same brain-volume range). Fig. 2 plots the identity across this range, with the sub-voxel region marked. The argument does not need the extreme case: it holds by one to two orders of magnitude at a lesion size that is unambiguously resolved and unambiguously matters. These are computed bounds from the stated f and r, not measurements from any primary study, and the error model behind them, a uniform background error and a free local error ratio, is an assumption we state rather than a property of any reconstruction. 

Loss-function symmetry. MSE and SSIM are indifferent to the sign of the error, since ( ˆXi − Xi)2 = ( Xi − ˆXi)2, whereas diagnosis is not: suppressing a true hyperintense lesion means the finding is missed, while adding background noise costs nothing clinically. An evaluation respecting that asymmetry must penalise the two directions differently, for example 

Lasym ( ˆX, X ) = α X

> i∈Ωlesion

max(0 , X i − ˆXi)2

+ β X

> i∈Ωbg

( ˆXi − Xi)2, (α ≫ β). (3) Several included studies already build objectives of this shape: lesion-mask-weighted losses motivated explicitly by the di-lution of lesion gradients among background voxels [46], overlap-weighted reconstruction losses that up-weight struc-ture against background [47], and gradient-based structure-preservation terms [48]. Their existence is evidence that the symmetry problem is recognised in practice, though none of these studies pairs the correction with a reader assessment. 

Realism–reward trade-off. Adversarial and perceptual ob-jectives reward outputs that look like the training distribution, which is not the same as outputs faithful to the measurement, so a generative reconstruction can gain plausible texture that was never acquired [14, 31]. 

Reference dependence. All four metrics presuppose a reg-istered, artifact-free reference. Intra-scan motion invalidates that assumption, and 69 of 263 studies rest their reference standard solely on a fully sampled acquisition, which is valid only where the subject did not move. 

D. RQ3: what current evaluation paradigms can and cannot establish 

Read against those mechanisms, the corpus supports aparadigm-by-paradigm account of what each evaluation ap-proach can demonstrate about prior-induced diagnostic error. Table X states the account compactly; the argument behind it is given here, because two of its six rows are analytical claims we derive rather than findings we extracted, and an analysis presented only in a table has not been argued. 

What the four empirical paradigms establish. Pixel-wise fidelity metrics establish aggregate agreement with a reference and nothing about focal change: by (2) the penalty for erasing a resolvable acute infarct is of the order of the reporting pre-cision, so a method can pass any threshold anyone would set while failing on the finding that matters. Perceptual and rank-trained metrics track reader preference better than MSE or SSIM as an optimisation target, but they inherit the variability of the readers they were trained on and, in the one study of this kind in the corpus, were calibrated on synthetically corrupted images rather than on reconstructions of undersampled k-space [18], so their transfer to the reconstruction setting is assumed rather than shown. Uncertainty estimates flag where a model is unsure, which is not the same question: a prior confident enough to remove a lesion is confident in the region where it removed it, so posterior variance can be low exactly where the diagnostic error is. Task-based observer assessment does settle the question directly, and it is the only paradigm here that does, which is why its scarcity in this corpus (57 of 263 studies, and 18 paired with a metric) is the review’s central finding rather than an incidental one. 

Two limits that follow from the physics, not from the corpus. 

The first concerns the check that reconstruction papers most often use to argue that an output is faithful to the data: the measurement-space residual ∥A ˆX − Y ∥2/∥Y ∥2 against a tolerance. This check cannot detect prior-induced edits at all, and the reason is structural rather than statistical. Write the reconstruction as the sum of its measured and unmeasured components, ˆX = A+A ˆX + ( I − A+A) ˆX. The second 13 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4

## Erased lesion volume (mm 3)

10 −4

10 −3

10 −2

10 −1

10 0

> |ΔPSNR| (dB)

local error ratio rr = 1000 

r = 100 

r = 10 

reporting precision: 0.01 dB below one voxel on clinical DWI (  ≈ 12--20 mm 3)5 mm 3 punctate microhaemorrhage: resolved on SWI, sub-voxel on DWI 100 mm 3 acute lacunar infarct: several voxels across on DWI 500 mm 3 small cortical infarct             

> Fig. 2. The PSNR cost of erasing a focal lesion, from Equation (2). Curves give |∆PSNR |against erased lesion volume for three local error ratios rat a
> 1.4L brain; the shaded band around r= 100 spans the 1.2–1.6L range. Markers show the three clinical anchors used in the text. The horizontal line at
> 0.01 dB is the two-decimal precision at which PSNR is conventionally reported, and the shaded left-hand region is the volume below a single voxel on a clinical DWI acquisition, where erasure is not defined because the finding is not resolved. Every value is computed from the identity under the stated error model; nothing in this figure is measured.

term lies in the null space N (A), and A annihilates it by definition, so any amount of structure written there, an erased lesion or an invented vessel alike, leaves the residual exactly unchanged. Undersampling is what creates that null space; the more aggressive the acceleration, the larger the subspace in which a learned prior can write freely without moving the number the field uses to certify data consistency. A residual check is therefore a two-sided measurement-fidelity band and not a safety test, and its apparent reassurance grows least trustworthy precisely where acceleration is highest. The second limit is the constructive corollary. If prior-supplied content lives in N (A), then isolating (I − A+A) ˆX

and inspecting it is the natural place to look for erasure and hallucination, since that is where both must reside [11, 31]. This is the one paradigm in Table X that is not represented in the corpus at all, and its practical obstacle is the same one that limits third-party auditing generally: computing the projection requires the forward operator, hence the raw k-space and the coil sensitivities, which commercial inline pipelines do not export (Section V). Causal and counterfactual auditing, which asks the most direct question of all, whether a specific finding survives a controlled change of acquisition, appears in a small part of the corpus and almost never for physics-constrained 

k-space reconstruction [13, 21, 33]. The answer to RQ3 is therefore not that current evaluation is weak but that it is mismatched: each paradigm in use answers a question adjacent to the safety question, and no paradigm now in use establishes reconstruction safety on its own. The two that could, task-based observer assessment and null-space inspection, are respectively rare and absent, and the requirements in Section IV-G follow from that pairing. 

E. Structure of the evaluation gap 

The counts above establish that safety-relevant evaluation is scarce. Analysis of the same per-study records establishes where the scarcity comes from, and indicates a division of labour rather than uniform neglect. 

The benchmarks cannot show the failure the field is worried about. One hundred and nine of the 263 studies ( 41 .4% )name a public dataset, and across the whole corpus those references resolve to eleven datasets: fastMRI, the Human Connectome Project, ADNI, IXI, UK Biobank, BraTS, OASIS, Calgary–Campinas, M4Raw, the developing Human Connec-tome Project and TCGA. Dataset labels are multi-valued (136 cohort assignments across the 109 studies), and of the 109, the cohorts named are healthy volunteers or population samples (55, 50 .5% ), chronic neurodegenerative cohorts (31, 28 .4% ), brain tumour cohorts (16, 14 .7% ), or raw-k-space benchmarks 14 

TABLE X WHAT EACH EVALUATION PARADIGM CAN AND CANNOT ESTABLISH ABOUT PRIOR -INDUCED DIAGNOSTIC ERROR (RQ3). R OWS 1–4 SUMMARIZE EVALUATION PRACTICE AND PERFORMANCE AS REPORTED IN THE INCLUDED STUDIES ; QUOTED VALUES ARE REPRESENTATIVE RESULTS FROM THE CITED PRIMARY STUDIES , NOT POOLED ESTIMATES . R OWS 5–6 STATE ANALYTICAL LIMITS DERIVED BY THE AUTHORS FROM THE ACQUISITION PHYSICS (OUR OWN ANALYSIS ; S ECTION IV) AND ARE LABELLED AS SUCH RATHER THAN ATTRIBUTED TO ANY PRIMARY STUDY .                                                 

> Evaluation Paradigm Core Mechanism What It Can and Cannot Establish Key References
> 1. Pixel-wise fidelity metrics L2/ SSIM whole-image voxel averaging Aggregate agreement with a reference only. Cannot resolve focal change: by (2), erasing a resolvable 100 mm 3lacunar infarct at r= 100 costs
> 0.03 dB. Requires a registered reference Recorded in 84 of the
> 144 evaluation-labelled studies 2. Perceptual & learned metrics Networks trained on radiologist rankings Tracks reader preference better than MSE/SSIM as an optimisation target (75 .2% ±1.3% and 79 .2% ±1.7% against readers’ own
> 61 .5% ±5.5% ). Inherits training-reader variability, and was calibrated on synthetically corrupted data rather than clinically undersampled acquisitions, so transfer is assumed (Section IV-D) Tang et al. [18] ( n= 18
> in corpus) 3. Uncertainty estimation Posterior sampling / Bayesian variance p(X|Y)
> Flags out-of-distribution inputs and regions of low confidence. Does not attribute missing structure to prior vs sampling operator; high confidence in hallucinated regions is possible Khawaled and Freiman [19] ( n= 18 in corpus) 4. Task-based observer assessment Human reader performance on a diagnostic task; model observers are its automated form, unrepresented here [27–29] Establishes diagnostic sufficiency directly; the gold standard in assessment theory. Costly and reader-variable ( 61 .5% ±5.5% , falling to 25% under absolute Likert scoring), and rarely paired with a metric: only 18 /263
> report both Radmanesh et al. [9], Lang et al. [20] ( n= 57
> in corpus) 5. Measurement-space residual check
> ∥AˆX−Y∥2/∥Y∥2against tolerance
> Cannot detect prior-induced edits : the residual is invariant to anything in
> N(A). A two-sided measurement-fidelity band, not a safety test Common diagnostic check in the reviewed studies 6. Null-space / hallucination mapping Structure written into the null-space component
> (I−A+A) ˆX
> Isolates prior-supplied content, where erasure and hallucination must reside. Requires A, hence raw k-space and coil sensitivities Bhadra et al. [31], Gottschling et al. [11]; formalization for reconstruction auditing is author-derived

not curated for pathology (34, 31 .2% ). These four shares are multi-label and sum to 124 .8% , a study naming two cohorts being counted in both; every other percentage here is single-label. Within this corpus, no study benchmarks against a dataset curated for acute ischemic stroke or intracranial haemorrhage. The sharper version of this finding sits in the annotation layer the field has already built. fastMRI+ supplies 

7,570 expert bounding-box annotations across thirty brain pathology categories [35], and not one of the thirty is a haem-orrhage category of any kind, microhaemorrhage included. The apparent counterexample should be stated plainly rather than left for a reader to find, because it is the category closest to this article’s own worked example: fastMRI+ does carry an image-level Lacunar Infarct label ( 113 annotations across 

32 subjects), alongside study-level Small Vessel Chronic White Matter Ischemic Change and a Global Ischemia label recorded for a single subject. It does not rescue the benchmark, and the reasons are the ones that matter for reconstruction safety. No fastMRI+ category distinguishes acute from chronic infarction, so a lacunar label carries no acuity and cannot identify the acute presentation whose erasure is at issue. The limit is in the source images as much as in the label set: the annotated series are axial T2-FLAIR, T1w or contrast-enhanced T1w only, so neither DWI, on which infarct acuity is established, nor SWI or T ∗ 

> 2

-weighted imaging, on which microhaemorrhage is read, was annotated at all. Acute vascular pathology is therefore absent even where annotation infrastructure exists, and it is absent for a reason that adding labels alone would not repair. Supplementary Table S10 sets out the full derivation, including the sub-selection of 1,001 of the 5,847 fastMRI brain studies, the category listing, and the single-annotator limitation that travels with these annotations. Stroke-lesion datasets do exist, ISLES [36] and ATLAS [37] among them, but they are seg-mentation benchmarks distributed as processed images without raw k-space, so they cannot serve reconstruction evaluation as released. This matters mechanically: lesion erasure cannot be measured on cohorts that contain no acute lesions, so a model can lead every public leaderboard in the field while remaining untested against the failure mode that would matter most in an emergency department. Where a pathology-labelled dataset is used at all it is BraTS, whose tumours are large, high-contrast mass lesions, close to the easiest possible case for lesion preservation and the least informative about the lacunar and punctate findings at issue here. The benchmark infrastructure and the metric therefore fail in the same direction. 

Rigour is divided between two literatures. Of the 263 studies, 84 ( 31 .9% ) release code but report no reader assess-ment, 44 ( 16 .7% ) report a reader assessment but release no code, 122 ( 46 .4% ) do neither, and only 13 ( 4.9% ) do both. The division tracks publication venue. Applying the post-hoc classification rule stated in Section III to all 263 venues, clinical imaging journals ( n = 131 ) carry reader assessment at nearly three times the rate of engineering and methods venues (n = 78 ), which in turn release code at nearly twice the clinical rate; general neuroscience and neuroimaging venues (n = 37 ) sit between. Supplementary Table S12 gives the full cross-tabulation. The rule leaves 17 of the 263 journal titles unmatched, and those are reported as a fourth unclassified 

group rather than forced into one of the three; the four groups between them account for all 57 reader studies and all 97 

code releases. The tendency for the two practices to fall in different studies rather than the same ones gives a Fisher exact odds ratio of 0.43 (p = 0 .013 ). The estimate is insensitive to the one labelling choice that could move it: taking the reader subset as the 61 studies originally labelled at extraction rather than the 57 verified at appraisal gives an odds ratio of 0.43 and 

p = 0 .010 . We nonetheless report the association descriptively rather than as a hypothesis test, because the venue grouping it rests on is a post-hoc keyword rule that was not part of the fixed protocol, and a p-value computed on a partition chosen 15                                                          

> TABLE XI EVALUATION PRACTICE ACROSS PUBLICATION ERAS AND METHOD FAMILIES (RECORDED LABELS ;LOWER BOUNDS ). R EADER -ASSESSMENT SHARE FELL AS THE CORPUS GREW AND RECOVERS ONLY PARTIALLY IN THE LATEST ERA ,AND THAT RECOVERY IS CARRIED BY SUBSCRIPTION -WALLED CLINICAL JOURNALS . A MONG THE FOUR LARGEST METHOD FAMILIES THE GENERATIVE GROUP ,THE ONE MOST ASSOCIATED WITH HALLUCINATION ,IS ONE OF THE TWO LEAST READER -EVALUATED AND IS INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM PHYSICS -BASED UNROLLED WORK ;THE SMALL SELF -SUPERVISED FAMILY (n= 17 )RECORDS NO READER ASSESSMENT AT ALL . R EADER SHARES USE THE VERIFIED READER SUBSET (n= 57 ; S ECTION III), SO COUNTS SUM TO 57 ACROSS THE ERA ROWS AND ARE MULTI -LABEL ACROSS THE FAMILY ROWS .
> Era nReader Uncert. Co-report
> 1995–2019 34 32 .4% (11/34) 5.9% 5.9%
> 2020–2022 55 18 .2% (10/55) 5.5% 7.3%
> 2023–2026 174 20 .7% (36/174) 7.5% 6.9%
> Method family (multi-label) Family nReader share
> Compressed sensing / parallel imaging 93 25 .8% (24/93) Motion correction 57 21 .1% (12/57) Super-resolution 25 20 .0% (5/25) Denoising 30 20 .0% (6/30) Generative (GAN/diffusion/VAE) 80 11 .3% (9/80) Physics-based / unrolled 37 10 .8% (4/37) Self-supervised / unsupervised 17 0.0% (0/17)

after seeing the data does not carry its nominal meaning. The direction and magnitude are what we rely on. The magnitude is the part that does not depend on the choice: computational verifiability and diagnostic verifiability are largely held by different communities, only one study in twenty holds both, and a safety argument requires both. 

Awareness of a failure mode does not produce the evaluation that would detect it. Generative studies record hallucination or fidelity instability in 31 /80 (38 .8% ) of cases, the highest share among the four largest method families, against 15 .1% 

for compressed-sensing and parallel-imaging work and 12 .3% 

for motion correction. Yet at 9/80 (11 .3% ) they are also among the two least reader-evaluated of those families, while the small self-supervised group records the corpus’s highest hallucination share ( 8/17 , 47 .1% ) and no reader assessment at all ( 0/17 ); per-family shares are in Table XI and Fig. 3. The sub-fields that most clearly recognise that their models can synthesise structure are the least likely to run the test capable of detecting it. 

Evaluation is not broadening as the field grows. Reader-assessment share fell from 32 .4% (1995–2019) to 18 .2% 

(2020–2022), recovering only partially to 20 .7% (2023–2026) while the corpus grew fivefold (Table XI and Fig. 4). What recovery there is comes entirely from the subscription-walled clinical literature: among 2023–2026 studies obtainable only through title-level library subscriptions, reader assessment runs at 52 .0% (13 of 25), against 15 .4% (23 of 149) in the openly accessible remainder of that era. Reader evidence, where it exists, sits disproportionately behind paywalls, and a review that cannot retrieve those texts will understate it; Section V-B takes the direction of that bias seriously rather than dismissing it. Among the 144 studies recording any evaluation paradigm, four in five record exactly one, and the share recording two or more fell across the same periods (Supplementary Table S12). Of the 84 studies recording a pixel-wise metric, 60 ( 71 .4% )record no reader, uncertainty or perceptual measure beside it. 

Readers are not displaced away from the sequences where the stakes are highest. One expectation is not borne out. The comparison must be made on disjoint strata to mean anything, because pulse sequence is a multi-label field and the naive contrast double-counts the 107 studies that acquire both an acute-pathology and a structural sequence (Supplementary Table S11 gives the correction). That the two disjoint strata below sum to 23 + 84 = 107 , the same number, is a third co-incidence of unrelated tallies rather than a transcription error, verified against the released per-study file as the two flagged in Section IV-G are. Restricted to studies acquiring one group and not the other, reader assessment runs at 5/23 (21 .7% ) for DWI or FLAIR without T1w or T2w against 10 /84 (11 .9% ) for T1w or T2w without DWI or FLAIR, representing a difference in the direction one would hope for, resting on 23 studies in the smaller stratum and not approaching significance (Fisher exact odds ratio 2.06 , p = 0 .31 ). We report it as descriptive and draw only the negative conclusion it supports: there is no evidence that reader assessment is displaced away from the sequences on which acute pathology is read. The deficit is one of scarcity and of distribution across research communities, not of misdirection within the clinical literature. 

F. Methodological quality and risk of bias 

Across all 57 QUADAS-2 appraised diagnostic and reader studies, methodological quality was highest for Flow and Timing ( 45 /57 low risk of bias, 78 .9% ), reflecting the standard retrospective undersampling paradigm where reconstruction and reference share the same acquisition timepoint without temporal degradation. Reference Standard and Index Test both sit at 26 /57 low risk ( 45 .6% ), each now below half, with high ratings arising where radiologists scored accelerated images with reference ground truth visible or where lesion truth was defined by the comparator images themselves (incorporation bias). Patient Selection remains the weakest domain ( 15 /57 

low risk, 26 .3% ; 19 /57 unclear, 33 .3% ; 23 /57 high risk, 

40 .4% ), as cohorts were predominantly retrospective, single-centre, and pathology-enriched without explicit prospective en-rolment rules. Applicability concerns follow a similar distribu-tion, with low concerns in Patient Selection for 36 /57 (63 .2% ), 16 0 10 20 30 40 50 

## Share of family's studies (%) 

## Compressed sensing / parallel imaging (n=93) Generative (GAN/ di ff usion/VAE) (n=80) Motion correction (n=57) Physics-based / unrolled (n=37) Denoising (n=30) Super-resolution (n=25) Self-supervised / unsupervised (n=17) 

15 39 12 27 30 20 47 26 11 21 11 20 20 0

## Records a hallucination or instability failure mode Carries any reader assessment         

> Fig. 3. Reader assessment against hallucination awareness, by method family (recorded extraction labels; lower bounds). Bars are the share of each family’s studies that record a hallucination or instability failure mode (orange) and the share that carry any reader assessment (blue), using the verified reader subset (n= 57 ). Bar labels are rounded to the nearest integer; the one-decimal values quoted in the text are the same quantities (for example 15 against 15 .1% ,
> 39 against 38 .8% ). Generated from the released per-study file ( included_characteristics.csv ) by 5_Code/make_figures.py ; every value is recomputable from the deposit.

Index Test for 30 /57 (52 .6% ), and Reference Standard for 

39 /57 (68 .4% ). The two rounds do not place the weaknesses in quite the same order, and the pooled shares above differ from the first round’s in every one of the seven domains. Low-risk shares fell for Index Test ( 53 .8% to 45 .6% ), applicability of the Index Test ( 59 .0% to 52 .6% ), Flow and Timing ( 82 .1% to 78 .9% ), Reference Standard ( 46 .2% to 45 .6% ) and applicability of Patient Selection ( 64 .1% to 63 .2% ); they rose for Patient Selection risk of bias ( 23 .1% to 26 .3% ) and applicability of the Reference Standard ( 59 .0% to 68 .4% ). The two largest movements concern the index test and the applicability of the reference standard, and the first of these runs against the appraised studies. The second-round studies are therefore not a favourable addition to the appraisal, which is why the pooled figures are the ones reported here. The first-round shares quoted here already incorporate the five studies re-appraised on recovered full text. Corpus-wide reporting transparency evaluated against STARD principles revealed substantial omissions across the broader 263 studies: 109 /263 (41 .4% ) provided no identifiable reference standard ( 47 stating none at all, Table III, and a further 62 naming a ground truth they left unspecified), scanner field strength was unreported in 54 /263 (20 .5% ), and 166 /263 

(63 .1% ) did not make code openly available. Overall, 220 /263 

studies ( 83 .7% ) omitted at least one key methodological indi-cator (field strength, reference standard, or open code). Two directions must be kept apart here, and conflating them has caused confusion elsewhere in this literature. With respect to the reconstruction methods , this reporting and selection pattern is anti-conservative: retrospective single-centre evaluation on curated data flatters reported performance relative to what 17 1995 –2019 2020 –2022 2023 –2026 050 100 150 200 

> Included studies (count)

## 34 55 174 Included studies (count) Any reader assessment (%) Metric and reader on the same data (%) 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 

> Share of era's studies (%)

## 32.4% 18.2% 20.7% 5.9% 7.3% 6.9%       

> Fig. 4. Evaluation practice across publication eras. Grey bars give the number of included studies per era (34, 55, 174); lines give the share with any reader assessment and the share co-reporting a fidelity metric and a reader assessment on the same data, using the verified reader subset ( n= 57 ). What recovery there is in 2023–2026 comes from subscription-walled clinical journals ( 52 .0% reader assessment in that stratum against 15 .4% in the open remainder; Section V-B). Generated from the released per-study file by 5_Code/make_figures.py ; counts are lower bounds from recorded extraction labels.

prospective clinical deployment would show. With respect to 

this review’s own conclusion , the same pattern is conservative: if published performance is flattered and failure is under-reported, then the scarcity of safety-relevant evaluation we document is an understatement, and the true gap is at least as large as the one measured. The safety argument turns on the second direction and is not weakened by the first. Detailed domain-level judgments and supporting quotations are available in the open project repository. 

G. Requirements for safety-oriented evaluation 

Read together, the synthesis implies five requirements that any evaluation intended to establish reconstruction safety must meet, each stated with the corpus evidence that motivates it and none met by more than a small minority of included studies. R1, focal task-based measurement : every global fidelity score must be accompanied by a region-of-interest or task-based observer measure, because spatial averaging is the first mechanism by which lesion-scale error disappears ( 60 /84 ,or 71 .4% , of pixel-metric studies record nothing beside the metric; this equals the artifact share of the R-reporting subset in Table VIII ( 45 /63 ) to the decimal, which is a coincidence of two unrelated tallies rather than a transcription error, verified against the released per-study file). R2, paired metric–reader reporting : metric validity claims require a reader comparison on the same data ( 6.8% of studies provide one). R3, reference-independent validity : evaluation must remain interpretable when no registered artifact-free reference exists ( 26 .2% rest solely on a fully sampled acquisition). R4, robustness under acquisition shift as a primary outcome , reported as aresult rather than a caveat; robustness or distribution shift is recorded as a failure-mode concern in 76 /263 studies ( 28 .9% ), almost always in the discussion rather than as a pre-specified endpoint. R5, hallucination-specific detection , operating on the image side, since measurement-space residual checks are provably blind to null-space edits. To these the analysis in Section IV-E adds a precondition: benchmarks containing the pathology whose erasure is at issue, without which R1, R2 and R5 cannot be exercised at all. V. D ISCUSSION 

Three conclusions follow. First, the comparison on which the field’s central proxy rests is almost never made: no included study reports a rank correlation between a pixel-wise fidelity metric and radiologist diagnostic assessment, and only 18 of 263 record the two on the same data at all. Where readers do appear, what is measured is mostly agreement between readers, and it is weak and condition-dependent. The finding therefore rests more on the absence of measurement than on the measurements that exist. Second, the reason is structural, through the four mechanisms of Section IV: background 18 

voxels average focal error away, the loss functions are sign-symmetric where diagnosis is not, adversarial terms pay for invented texture, and every one of these metrics assumes a registered reference that motion destroys. The mechanisms are mathematical properties of the metrics themselves; how often each matters clinically is the part the thin reader evidence leaves less certain. Third, no evaluation paradigm now in use settles the safety question by itself, a conclusion resting on the paradigm-by-paradigm synthesis of Section IV. The analysis of where the gap comes from, which was not part of the fixed protocol and is reported as exploratory throughout, changes what would follow from these findings if it holds. The shortfall does not look like a uniform oversight; it co-occurs with two structural features. Evaluation practice is divided between a community that releases code and a community that runs readers, with only 4.9% of studies doing both (an association we interpret descriptively in Section IV-E, its venue partition being post-hoc), and the benchmark datasets named in this corpus contain no acute pathology, so the failure mode of greatest clinical consequence is not merely under-measured but unmeasurable on the datasets in common use. If that association is causal, which this design cannot establish, recommendations addressed to individual authors will not close the gap; what would be required is benchmark construction and reporting conventions that force the two halves of the evidence together. This matters because accelerated reconstruction has left the research setting. Deep-learning acceleration, denoising and image enhancement ship inside commercial MRI products, several of them cleared as software as a medical device: one such tool, an FDA-cleared vendor-agnostic DICOM-domain enhancement product, is evaluated in this corpus by a prospec-tive multicentre multireader trial [49], which is also a reminder that a cleared product can be validated on one sequence family and deployed across others. Published guidance in both jurisdictions increasingly asks manufacturers to demonstrate performance for the device’s stated intended use and under conditions representative of deployment rather than on cu-rated development data: the FDA, Health Canada and MHRA guiding principles on good machine learning practice ask that datasets be representative of the intended patient population and that testing be independent of training [50], the EU AI Act imposes accuracy and robustness obligations on high-risk AI systems [51], and the Medical Device Regulation requires clinical evidence appropriate to the device’s intended purpose [52]. Our reading of that guidance is that aggregate pixel-wise fidelity cannot support a claim about small-lesion detection, because (2) shows the aggregate does not move when the small lesion is removed. That reading is ours: no regulator has reviewed or endorsed it, and none of the three instruments names an image-quality metric. A practical obstacle compounds it, and it is the reason the requirements in Section IV-G are addressed to infrastructure rather than to authors. Commercial inline pipelines export DICOM images after undisclosed normalisation, coil com-bination and vendor post-processing, and the raw complex 

k-space typically never leaves the scanner. Every method in Table X that could detect a prior-induced edit needs something the exported DICOM does not carry: the null-space projection needs the forward operator and the coil sensitivities, a counterfactual audit needs the ability to re-run the acquisition under a controlled change, and even a measurement-space residual needs Y . Independent third-party auditing of a deployed reconstruction is therefore not merely difficult but structurally impossible without an open raw-data interface, and no amount of reporting discipline by authors of research papers can supply one. Three things follow that are worth stating as claims rather than as recommendations. 

The cheapest useful change costs no new data. A recon-struction paper that claims its method preserves small lesions can state, from (2) and its own brain volume and assumed local error ratio, the change in global PSNR that erasing the smallest lesion it claims to preserve would produce. For a lacunar infarct that is about 0.03 dB, which is smaller than the difference the paper is likely to be reporting between its method and its baseline. This is arithmetic, not a new experiment, and it converts an implicit claim into an explicit one at the point where the claim is made. Nothing in this review suggests such a line would be difficult; the finding is that nobody currently reports it. 

The two-community split is self-reinforcing, which is why exhortation has not worked. Each community’s evaluation is close to the best it can do with the data it can obtain. Engineering venues evaluate on the datasets that carry raw 

k-space, and those contain healthy volunteers, chronic cohorts and tumours rather than acute pathology, so a reader study run on them would not test lesion preservation even if it were run. Clinical venues have the pathology, the readers and the acute presentations, and no access to raw k-space or to the vendor’s reconstruction, so a reproducibility claim is not available to them. The 4.9% of studies doing both are not more diligent than the rest; they are the studies that happened to sit where both kinds of access coincide. An instruction to individual authors to run more reader studies asks most of them to do something the data available to them makes uninformative. 

The missing object is a dataset, and its requirements are now specifiable. The public resources discussed in this re-view supply each necessary component separately, and the distinction between what the corpus uses and what merely exists is part of the point: raw multi-coil k-space is avail-able in three of the eleven datasets the included studies actually name (fastMRI, Calgary–Campinas, M4Raw); acute cerebrovascular pathology with expert segmentation exists in ISLES and ATLAS, which no included study uses because they are distributed as processed images; and reader-level pathology annotation on brain MRI exists in fastMRI+, which no included study uses either. None combines them, and the combination is what every requirement in Section IV-G presupposes: raw k-space so the forward operator is known, acute lesions confirmed against a standard independent of the images being evaluated, lesion-level annotation so a focal figure of merit can be computed, and a licence permitting redistribution so the benchmark can be used by people who did not collect it. That object does not exist, and until it does the safety question is not merely unanswered but unaskable 19 

on public data. 

A. Priorities for future research 

Three of the five requirements in Section IV-G translate directly into research priorities, and we do not restate them here: paired metric–reader reporting (R2), robustness under acquisition shift reported as a primary endpoint rather than a caveat (R4), and benchmarks carrying the pathology whose erasure is at issue, which is the precondition on which R1, R2 and R5 all depend. Calibrated voxel-level uncertainty that tracks local reconstruction error [19] belongs with R4 and is the form in which R4 is most likely to be actionable for generative and self-supervised architectures. A fourth priority does not follow from anything this review extracted, and we separate it for that reason. Many current pipelines operate slice by slice and introduce inter-slice dis-continuities on isotropic 3D acquisitions, so reconstruction and auditing frameworks should model 3D anatomical coherence directly [33] while meeting scanner-side latency constraints. Slice-wise versus volumetric processing was not an extraction field in this review. We state the priority on mechanistic grounds and on the cited work, not on a corpus count. 

B. Threats to validity 

The strongest conclusions rest on a small subset of reader-based studies, and we state that prominently rather than in passing: 57 of 263 studies carry any reader assessment and 18 pair it with a metric. Four threat classes bound what follows from that base. 

How to read the limitations below. They are not all bounded in the same way, and treating them as one undifferentiated list of caveats would misrepresent what this review knows about itself. Three kinds appear. Some are bounded by released evidence : the non-retrieval analysis, the paywall stratification and the appraisal-agreement decomposition are each quantified from files a reader can recompute. Some are bounded by argument : the direction of publication bias and of the reporting asymmetry is reasoned rather than measured, and we say which way each points. One is simply unbounded , and it is the sharpest: extraction has no reliability estimate. Three properties of the extraction layer follow from that and should be weighed together. First, its depth is deliberately shallow. Method, failure-mode and evaluation categories were assigned from title, abstract and controlled vocabulary, so the prevalence counts are floors on what studies report at that level rather than measurements of what they did. Second, the shallowness is visible in the counts themselves: only 84 of 263 studies are recorded as reporting a pixel-wise fidelity metric, and 39 of the 57 verified reader studies are recorded as reporting none, which for this literature is implausible as a description of practice and entirely plausible as a description of abstracts. A further 119 of 263 studies ( 45 .2% ) carry no evaluation-paradigm label at all, which is why we report both the /263 and the /144 denominators wherever the distinction matters. Third, the headline 18 /263 mixes two depths: the reader label was verified against full text and corrected at ap-praisal, while the metric label was not. That asymmetry biases the intersection downward by an unknown factor, and it is the single respect in which our headline figure is least defensible as a point estimate, though the direction is conservative, since correcting it could only widen the measured gap. What we offer in place of a reliability coefficient is au-ditability, and the substitution is deliberate rather than ashortfall we failed to notice. Every extracted value is released with the verbatim quotation that supports it, so a reader can check whether an assignment is correct , which is a stronger and more useful guarantee than a coefficient showing that two people were consistent . It is not a substitute for reliability in the statistical sense, and we do not claim it is: consistency and correctness bound different failure modes, and only the first is estimable from our records. A duplicate-extraction exercise on a random subsample, reported with a κ, is the obvious next step and we name it as an outstanding task rather than a completed one. 

Construct validity. We searched with broad, high-sensitivity terms for architectures, artifacts and evaluation paradigms, and the corpus spans the reconstruction-safety construct, from pixel-wise metrics through perceptual losses to reader studies. What the corpus cannot guarantee is that a metric means the same thing wherever it appears: studies differ in what they treat as the quantity of interest, so a rank correlation with reader scores in one paper is not straightforwardly the same measurement as in another, and grouping such values under one heading is an interpretation we make, not a property of the data. The venue classification underlying Section IV-E is likewise a post-hoc keyword assignment, released with the data rather than extracted from the studies. 

Internal validity. A protocol fixed before screening began, a documented search across seven databases, and independent screening and appraisal by three reviewers provide robust pro-tection, and every extracted value is released with the verbatim snippet supporting it. Five specific threats bound these find-ings. First, 81 of the 1,149 candidate reports remain without obtainable text through structural licensing barriers. Screening the nearest obtainable stratum (the 341 reports recovered only through title-level subscriptions) found 86 .2% ineligible on the same criteria, so at that rate the 81 would contribute on the order of 11 studies rather than 81 . That bounds the missing evidence without establishing that the bias is nil. Non-retrieval is demonstrably not random with respect to the variable this review measures: within the same stratum, 2023–2026 studies carry reader assessment at 52 .0% against 15 .4% in the openly accessible literature of that era. Both findings point the same way. Reader evidence is over-represented behind paywalls, so a review that cannot retrieve those texts understates how much reader assessment the field performs, and our headline scarcity figures are conservative bounds rather than point estimates. Second, four included studies were assessed on abstract and controlled vocabulary alone and one on partial text; a sensitivity analysis recomputing all headline metrics on the 258 studies verified against complete full text leaves every finding directionally stable (e.g., metric–reader co-reporting remains 7.0% vs 6.8% ). Third, every QUADAS-2 tally in this article rests on the whole verified reader subset ( n = 57 , 399 

domain judgements), so none is computed on a partial base. 20 

The second round moved all seven domain distributions, and the movements that most concern the index test run against the appraised studies: low risk of bias for the Index Test falls from 53 .8% to 45 .6% , and high applicability concern for the Index Test rises from 33 .3% to 40 .4% (Section IV). Four studies remain abstract-only and are appraised on that basis. Fourth, reliability is measured for screening and for appraisal but not for extraction, and extraction is the sharpest methodological limitation of the review. The screening and appraisal coefficients, and the decomposition that must be read with the appraisal figure, are given in Section III and not restated here; the consequence for this section is that 126 

of the 399 QUADAS-2 judgements were reached at a level of agreement a single rater could not be relied on to reproduce, so the domain shares in Table III carry that uncertainty. It does not propagate to the prevalence findings, which rest on extraction labels rather than QUADAS-2 ratings, but it bounds how firmly the risk-of-bias picture can be stated. Neither screening nor appraisal agreement transfers to extraction. The duplicate-screening sample is also smaller than the 300 –400 records a referee might reasonably ask for, and the interval reflects that. Fifth, four studies recorded at extraction as observer or reader designs were found at appraisal to contain no human reader and were reclassified as algorithmic, moving the reader subset from 61 to 57 and the algorithmic set from 202 to 

206 . The effect on the headline numbers is small and in the direction of a larger gap: metric–reader co-reporting moves from 7.6% to 6.8% , the 2023–2026 reader share from 23 .0% 

to 20 .7% , the code-and-reader intersection from 5.3% to 4.9% ,and the Fisher exact p from 0.010 to 0.013 at an odds ratio that moves only from 0.43 to 0.43 . Those four corrections are also the source of the 4/61 (6.6% ) error rate quoted above, and the design field is the only one that received three-reviewer full-text verification: a comparable rate elsewhere would not overturn any finding here, since the headline shares are separated from their comparators by more than that margin, but it is a source of variability measured in one place and assumed in the rest. 

External validity. Among the 209 studies stating a field strength the corpus covers 1.5, 3 and 7 Tesla ( 21 , 153 and 

35 respectively), together with several vendors’ coil configura-tions and the major pulse sequences; the remaining 54 (20 .5% )state none, and nothing about field-strength coverage should be read into them. Tasks, protocols, architectures, datasets and metrics otherwise vary substantially, which is why we report the direction and consistency of findings rather than their mag-nitudes. Many algorithmic studies evaluate on retrospectively undersampled single-centre data, which flatters performance relative to prospective multi-centre use; where the public data were themselves pre-processed before undersampling, that inflation is larger again [53]. Prospective multicentre reader evidence is thin, and the examples this review leans on each carry a boundary that must travel with them: the emergency-department comparison is single-centre and its one discrepant finding is a single case [20]; the widest-ranging acceleration reader study is retrospective and single-centre [9]; and the largest prospective multicentre multireader trial evaluated 3D T1-weighted acquisitions only, with an image-domain DICOM enhancement tool rather than reconstruction from undersampled k-space, reported improved rather than degraded lesion conspicuity, and has several authors affiliated with the vendor of the evaluated tool [49]; we cite it for what it does establish, that such tools are cleared and deployed. Finally, the benchmark concentration of Section IV-E (eleven public datasets named across the corpus, not one curated for acute ischaemic stroke or intracranial haemorrhage ) caps how far any leaderboard result can be carried into emergency imaging. 

Conclusion validity. Because pixel-wise metrics agree only loosely with radiologist judgement (RQ1), a study resting on PSNR and SSIM alone supports a safety claim less well than one with readers or uncertainty-aware observers, and we weight the evidence accordingly. Publication bias favouring successful reconstructions is a material limitation and works in the same direction, making the reported prevalence of failure evidence an understatement: a literature with little incentive to report failure is exactly the corpus a review about failure must draw on, and the absence of a common effect measure rules out funnel-plot and small-study asymmetry tests. We applied no certainty framework such as GRADE, since the review produces no pooled effect estimates for such a framework to rate. Prevalence counts derive from recorded extraction labels and understate true practice, and no range we quote should be read as an interval estimate rather than as values from named studies. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We reviewed 263 primary studies on the safety, artifacts and fidelity of deep learning-based brain MRI reconstruction. Wherever metrics and readers have been compared, agreement between conventional fidelity scores and radiologist judgement is weak, and at most 18 of the 263 studies record the paired metric–reader evaluation capable of exposing that divergence. Every prevalence figure here is a floor derived from screening-level labels rather than a measurement of practice, and al-though screening agreement was high, the extraction labels those floors rest on carry no reliability estimate of their own. The weakness is structural rather than incidental: the four mechanisms identified under RQ2 explain why, and the safety question is not one that any current evaluation paradigm answers alone. The contribution we would emphasise is the account of why the gap persists, and we offer it as a hypothesis these data are consistent with rather than as an established structural fact: the venue grouping it rests on is post-hoc, so although the association between code release and reader assessment is strong and would be conventionally significant on a pre-specified partition, we do not read it as a test (Section IV-E). What does not depend on that classification is the magnitude. Only 4.9% of studies both release code and run readers, so computational verifiability and diagnostic verifiability are, as recorded, held by different studies roughly nineteen times in twenty; and no dataset named in this corpus is curated for acute stroke or intracranial haemorrhage. A reconstruction model can therefore satisfy every metric and every public benchmark 21 

in current use while the question of whether it preserves a small acute lesion has never been asked. Closing that gap requires benchmarks that contain the pathology at issue and reporting conventions under which no pixel-wise metric appears alone, and until both exist, claims that accelerated reconstruction is diagnostically safe will continue to rest on measurements that cannot see the failures that matter. One change is available immediately and needs no new data. Equation (2) converts any lesion volume into the PSNR movement its erasure would cause, so an author reporting a reconstruction at a stated acceleration can state, alongside the global score, the smallest focal change that score is capable of registering at their image size. For a 100 mm 3 infarct that figure is around 0.03 dB, which is below the precision at which PSNR is conventionally reported. Publishing that bound next to the metric costs one line, requires no reader and no new acquisition, and makes explicit what the metric is silent about. It is the cheapest useful step towards evaluation that could detect the failure this review is concerned with. 22 

FUNDING STATEMENT 

This research was supported by institutional research com-puting infrastructure and scholarship funding from RMIT University. The funder had no role in the design of the review, the search strategy, the eligibility criteria, the screening or appraisal of studies, the synthesis or interpretation of findings, the writing of this report, or the decision to submit it for publication. No external, commercial, or industry funding was received, and no vendor of MRI hardware or reconstruction software contributed financial or non-financial support to this work. ETHICS STATEMENT 

This review synthesises secondary data from published, de-identified study reports. It involved no human participants, no animal experimentation and no collection of private health data, so institutional review board approval and patient in-formed consent were not required. DATA AND CODE AVAILABILITY 

The review protocol, executed search strategy, screen-ing criteria, every title/abstract and full-text decision with its recorded reason, the completed PRISMA 2020 checklist, the per-study extraction and QUADAS-2 work-sheets for all 263 included studies, the analysis code, and the duplicate-screening sample and per-reviewer ap-praisal worksheets with their agreement computations (kappa_worksheet_214_HUMAN_*.csv , kappa_hu-man_results.csv , reviewer_worksheet_R*.csv 

and quadas2_three_reviewer_worksheet.csv ) are openly available on the Open Science Framework at https: //doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/832Z6 and mirrored at https://gith ub.com/dmai287/brain-mri-recon-safety-slr, archived at Zen-odo under DOI 10.5281/zenodo.22100024 (release v1.0.3 ,commit 8c856ba ; concept DOI 10.5281/zenodo.21836966). Every count reported here is regenerable from included_-characteristics.csv in that release, and the deposit encodes the same reader/algorithmic partition ( 57 /206 ) that this article reports, with the four reclassified studies flagged individually. The two figures generated from that file and the 

∆PSNR identity figure are produced by 5_Code/make_-figures.py and 5_Code/make_dpsnr_figure.py .The deposit is retrospective and is documented as such. Full-text PDFs of the included studies are not redistributed, as publisher licence terms do not permit it; the DOI list in the released bibliography ( included_studies_-263.bib ) identifies the corpus in full. CR EDI T AUTHORSHIP CONTRIBUTION STATEMENT 

Dat Tat Mai: Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Visualization, Project administration, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. Thai Viet Pham: Investigation, Data cura-tion, Validation, Resources, Writing – review & editing. Thu Nguyen Thi Dang: Investigation, Data curation, Validation, Writing – review & editing. James Jin Kang: Supervision, Validation, Writing – review & editing. DECLARATION OF COMPETING INTEREST 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. DECLARATION OF GENERATIVE AI AND AI-ASSISTED TECHNOLOGIES IN THE MANUSCRIPT PREPARATION PROCESS 

During the preparation of this work the authors used genera-tive AI technologies solely to assist with language editing and proofreading of the manuscript text. After using these tools, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the published article. All study screening, data extraction, and quality appraisals reported in this review were conducted manually by the authors. APPENDIX A. T HE INCLUDED STUDIES AND HOW TO TRACE A CLAIM TO THEM 

All 263 included primary studies appear in the reference list, so the evidence base is part of the article of record rather than of the supplement alone. Because the synthesis is narrative and most claims are grouped rather than attached to a single study, the reference list alone does not show which studies produced a given number. That mapping is carried by included_characteristics.csv , which holds one row per included study with its extracted method family, evaluation paradigm, failure modes, sequences, field strength, reference standard and code availability, each with the verba-tim quotation supporting it, so any count, share or crosstab in Section IV can be reproduced and the contributing studies listed by filtering that file. Supplementary Tables S1–S3 give the same 263 studies as a numbered index by publication year, and included_characteristics_supplement.csv 

adds the per-study QUADAS-2 and reproducibility ratings. The reference list therefore contains two kinds of entry, and a reader needs a rule to tell them apart. It prints 299 : the 263 

included studies, carried into the list under PRISMA 2020 item 17, and 36 narrative-only works cited in argument. An entry appearing in the numbered index of Supplementary Tables S1–S3 is a member of the reviewed corpus; an entry that does not is a narrative citation. Equivalently, and checkable without the supplement, every narrative citation is cited at a specific point in the running text of Sections 1–6, whereas corpus entries not discussed by name appear without an in-text citation. The two lists were generated by indepen-dent mechanisms and agree exactly as sets. We would be glad to move the corpus to a separately labelled supplementary reference list if the editor prefers that production route. APPENDIX B. S UPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL 

Supplementary material associated with this article (Sup-plementary Tables S1–S12 and Supplementary Figure S1) is provided as a separate document. Tables S1–S3 list all 263 included primary studies with full bibliographic details; Tables S4–S9 give the comparison against related secondary 23 

studies, the search vocabulary and its derivation, the extraction form, the thematic evidence architecture, the four metric-failure mechanisms with their evidence sources, and the provenance of every released data file. Tables S10–S12 carry the supporting detail for Section IV-E: the annotation-layer derivation for fastMRI+ (S10), the disjoint-strata correction for the sequence contrast (S11), and the venue cross-tabulation with evaluation-paradigm multiplicity by era (S12). REFERENCES 

[1] M. Zaitsev, J. Maclaren, and M. Herbst, “Motion artifacts in MRI: A review,” NMR in Biomedicine , vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 911– 935, 2015. [2] K. P. Pruessmann, M. Weiger, M. B. Scheidegger, and P. Boe-siger, “SENSE: Sensitivity encoding for fast MRI,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 952–962, 1999. [3] M. Lustig, D. Donoho, and J. M. Pauly, “Sparse MRI: The application of compressed sensing for rapid MR imaging,” 

Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1182– 1195, 2007. [4] J. Schlemper, J. Caballero, J. V. Hajnal, A. N. Price, and D. Rueckert, “A deep cascade of convolutional neural networks for dynamic MR image reconstruction,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 491–503, 2017. [5] K. Hammernik, T. Klatzer, E. Kobler, M. P. Recht, D. K. Sodickson, T. Pock, and F. Knoll, “Learning a variational network for reconstruction of accelerated MRI data,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 79, no. 6, pp. 3055–3071, 2018. [6] H. K. Aggarwal, M. P. Mani, and M. Jacob, “MoDL: Model-based deep learning architecture for inverse problems,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 394–405, 2018. [7] G. Yang, S. Yu, H. Dong, G. Slabaugh, P. L. Dragotti, X. Ye, F. Liu, S. Arridge, J. Keegan, Y. Guo, and D. Firmin, “DAGAN: Deep de-aliasing generative adversarial networks for fast compressed sensing MRI reconstruction,” IEEE Trans-actions on Medical Imaging , vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1310–1321, 2018. [8] Y. Song, J. Sohl-Dickstein, D. P. Kingma, A. Kumar, S. Er-mon, and B. Poole, “Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. [9] A. Radmanesh, M. J. Muckley, T. Murrell, E. Lindsey, A. Sri-ram, F. Knoll, D. K. Sodickson, and Y. W. Lui, “Exploring the acceleration limits of deep learning variational network-based two-dimensional brain MRI,” Radiology. Artificial intelligence ,2022, pMID: 36523647. [10] V. Antun, F. Renna, C. Poon, B. Adcock, and A. C. Hansen, “On instabilities of deep learning in image reconstruction and the potential costs of AI,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 117, no. 48, pp. 30 088–30 095, 2020. [11] N. M. Gottschling, V. Antun, A. C. Hansen, and B. Adcock, “The troublesome kernel: On hallucinations, no free lunches, and the accuracy–stability trade-off in inverse problems,” SIAM Review , vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 73–104, 2025. [12] K. Sommer, A. Saalbach, T. Brosch, C. Hall, N. M. Cross, and J. B. Andre, “Correction of motion artifacts using a multiscale fully convolutional neural network,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2020, pMID: 32054615. [13] A. G¨ ung¨ or, S. U. Dar, c. ¨Ozt¨ urk, Y. Korkmaz, H. A. Bedel, G. Elmas, M. Ozbey, and T. C ¸ ukur, “Adaptive diffusion priors for accelerated MRI reconstruction,” Medical image analysis ,2023, pMID: 37384951. [14] X. Zhou, A. R. Balachandra, M. F. Romano, S. P. Chin, R. Au, and V. B. Kolachalama, “Adversarial learning for MRI reconstruction and classification of cognitively impaired individuals,” IEEE Access , 2024. [15] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004. [16] A. Mason, J. Rioux, S. E. Clarke, A. Costa, M. Schmidt, V. Keough, T. Huynh, and S. Beyea, “Comparison of objective image quality metrics to expert radiologists’ scoring of diag-nostic quality of MR images,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1064–1072, 2020. [17] S. Yu, G. Dai, Z. Wang, L. Li, X. Wei, and Y. Xie, “A consistency evaluation of signal-to-noise ratio in the quality assessment of human brain magnetic resonance images,” BMC medical imaging , 2018, pMID: 29769079. [18] C. Tang, L. B. Eisenmenger, L. Rivera-Rivera, E. Huo, J. C. Junn, A. D. Kuner, T. H. Oechtering, A. Peret, J. Starekova, and K. M. Johnson, “Incorporating radiologist knowledge into MRI quality metrics for machine learning using rank-based ratings,” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2025, pMID: 39690114. [19] S. Khawaled and M. Freiman, “NPB-rec: A non-parametric bayesian deep-learning approach for undersampled MRI recon-struction with uncertainty estimation,” Artificial intelligence in medicine , 2024, pMID: 38462289. [20] M. Lang, B. Clifford, W.-C. Lo, B. P. Applewhite, A. Tabari, A. L. M. Goncalves Filho, Z. Hosseini, M. G. Figueiro Longo, S. F. Cauley, K. Setsompop, B. Bilgic, T. Feiweier, M. H. Lev, P. W. Schaefer, O. Rapalino, S. Y. Huang, and J. Conklin, “Clinical evaluation of a 2-minute ultrafast brain MR protocol for evaluation of acute pathology in the emergency and in-patient settings,” AJNR. American Journal of Neuroradiology ,vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 379–385, 2024. [21] N. Pawlowski, D. C. Castro, and B. Glocker, “Deep structural causal models for medical imaging,” Advances in Neural In-formation Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 33, pp. 15 061– 15 073, 2020. [22] D. C. Castro, I. Walker, and B. Glocker, “Causality matters in medical imaging,” Nature Communications , vol. 11, p. 3673, 2020. [23] D. Liang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, and Y. Zhu, “Deep learning for magnetic resonance image reconstruction: An overview,” IEEE Transactions on Radiation and Plasma Medical Sciences ,vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 641–655, 2020. [24] J. Montalt-Tordera, V. Muthurangu, A. Hauptmann, and J. A. Steeden, “Machine learning in magnetic resonance imaging: Image reconstruction,” Physica Medica , vol. 83, pp. 79–87, 2021. [25] F. Knoll, K. Hammernik, C. Zhang, S. Moeller, T. Pock, D. K. Sodickson, and M. Akc ¸akaya, “Deep-learning methods for parallel magnetic resonance imaging reconstruction: A survey of the current approaches, trends, and issues,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 128–140, 2020. [26] A. Kazerouni, E. K. Aghdam, M. Heidari, R. Azad, M. Fayyaz, I. Hacihaliloglu, and D. Merhof, “Diffusion models in medical imaging: A comprehensive survey,” Medical Image Analysis ,vol. 88, p. 102846, 2023. [27] H. H. Barrett, J. Yao, J. P. Rolland, and K. J. Myers, “Model observers for assessment of image quality,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 90, no. 21, pp. 9758–9765, 1993. [28] H. H. Barrett and K. J. Myers, Foundations of Image Science .Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2004. [29] International Commission on Radiation Units and Measure-ments, “Medical imaging — the assessment of image quality,” ICRU, Bethesda, MD, Tech. Rep. ICRU Report 54, 1996. [30] O. Esteban, D. Birman, M. Schaer, G. Kiar, K. J. Gorgolewski, and R. A. Poldrack, “MRIQC: Advancing the automatic pre-diction of image quality in MRI from unseen sites,” PLoS 24 

ONE , vol. 12, no. 9, p. e0184661, 2017. [31] S. Bhadra, V. A. Kelkar, F. J. Brooks, and M. A. Anasta-sio, “On hallucinations in tomographic image reconstruction,” 

IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 40, no. 11, pp. 3249–3260, 2021. [32] P. Sanchez, A. Kascenas, X. Liu, A. Q. O’Neil, and S. A. Tsaftaris, “What is healthy? generative counterfactual dif-fusion for lesion localization,” in Deep Generative Models (DGM4MICCAI), MICCAI Workshop , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 13609. Springer, 2022, pp. 34–44. [33] W. Peng, T. Xia, F. D. S. Ribeiro, T. Bosschieter, E. Adeli, Q. Zhao, B. Glocker, and K. M. Pohl, “Latent causal modeling for 3D brain MRI counterfactuals,” Deep Generative Models ,2026. [34] F. Knoll, J. Zbontar, A. Sriram, M. J. Muckley, M. Bruno, A. Defazio, M. Parente, K. J. Geras, J. Katsnelson, H. Chan-darana, Z. Zhang, M. Drozdzal, A. Romero, M. Rabbat, P. Vincent, J. Pinkerton, D. Wang, N. Yakubova, E. Owens, C. L. Zitnick, M. P. Recht, D. K. Sodickson, and Y. W. Lui, “fastmri: A publicly available raw k-space and DICOM dataset of knee images for accelerated MR image reconstruction using machine learning,” Radiology: Artificial Intelligence , vol. 2, no. 1, p. e190007, 2020. [35] R. Zhao, B. Yaman, Y. Zhang, R. Stewart, A. Dixon, F. Knoll, Z. Huang, Y. W. Lui, M. S. Hansen, and M. P. Lungren, “fastMRI+, clinical pathology annotations for knee and brain fully sampled magnetic resonance imaging data,” Scientific Data , vol. 9, p. 152, 2022. [36] M. R. Hernandez Petzsche, E. de la Rosa, U. Hanning, R. Wiest, W. Valenzuela, M. Reyes, M. Meyer, S.-L. Liew, F. Kofler, I. Ezhov et al. , “ISLES 2022: A multi-center mag-netic resonance imaging stroke lesion segmentation dataset,” 

Scientific Data , vol. 9, p. 762, 2022. [37] S.-L. Liew, B. P. Tavenner, M. R. Donnelly, A. Zavaliangos-Petropulu, J. N. Jeong, G. Barisano, A. Hutton, J. P. Simon, J. M. Juliano, A. Suri et al. , “A large, curated, open-source stroke neuroimaging dataset to improve lesion segmentation algorithms,” Scientific Data , vol. 9, p. 320, 2022. [38] M. J. Page, J. E. McKenzie, P. M. Bossuyt, I. Boutron, T. C. Hoffmann, C. D. Mulrow et al. , “The PRISMA 2020 state-ment: An updated guideline for reporting systematic reviews,” 

BMJ , vol. 372, p. n71, 2021. [39] P. F. Whiting, A. W. S. Rutjes, M. E. Westwood, S. Mallett, J. J. Deeks, J. B. Reitsma, M. M. G. Leeflang, J. A. C. Sterne, and P. M. M. Bossuyt, “QUADAS-2: A revised tool for the quality assessment of diagnostic accuracy studies,” Annals of Internal Medicine , vol. 155, no. 8, pp. 529–536, 2011. [40] P. M. Bossuyt, J. B. Reitsma, D. E. Bruns, C. A. Gatsonis, P. P. Glasziou, L. Irwig, J. G. Lijmer, D. Moher, D. Rennie, and H. C. W. de Vet, “STARD 2015: An updated list of essential items for reporting diagnostic accuracy studies,” BMJ , vol. 351, p. h5527, 2015. [41] J. A. C. Sterne, M. A. Hern´ an, B. C. Reeves, J. Savovi´ c, N. D. Berkman, M. Viswanathan, D. Henry, I. R. White, and J. P. T. Higgins, “Robins-i: A tool for assessing risk of bias in non-randomised studies of interventions,” BMJ , vol. 355, p. i4919, 2016. [42] M. Campbell, J. E. McKenzie, A. Sowden, S. V. Katikireddi, S. E. Brennan, S. Ellis, J. Hartmann-Boyce, R. Ryan, S. Shep-perd, J. Thomas, V. Welch, and H. Thomson, “Synthesis without meta-analysis (SWiM) in systematic reviews: reporting guideline,” BMJ , vol. 368, p. l6890, 2020. [43] M. J. Muckley, B. Riemenschneider, A. Radmanesh, S. Kim, G. Jeong, J. Ko, Y. Jun, H. Shin, D. Hwang, M. Mostapha, S. Arberet, D. Nickel, Z. Ramzi, P. Ciuciu, J.-L. Starck, J. Teuwen, D. Karkalousos, C. Zhang, A. Sriram, Z. Huang, N. Yakubova, Y. W. Lui, and F. Knoll, “Results of the 2020 fastMRI challenge for machine learning MR image reconstruc-tion,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2306–2317, 2021. [44] S. Schauman, A. v. Niekerk, O. Norbeck, H. Ryd´ en, E. Avventi, and S. Skare, “An exploration of motion-sampling interactions in 3D MRI for neuroimaging,” Magnetic reso-nance in medicine , 2026, pMID: 41204061. [45] N. Li, W.-T. Wang, D. L. Pham, and J. A. Butman, “Artifactual microhemorrhage generated by susceptibility weighted image processing,” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI ,2015, pMID: 25143262. [46] J. Lee, H. Kim, H. Chung, H. Eom, J. Jang, C.-H. Sohn, and K. S. Choi, “Lesion-aware post-training of latent diffusion models for synthesizing diffusion MRI from CT perfusion,” in 

Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2025 . Springer, 2026. [47] N. Jayakumar, T. Hossain, and M. Zhang, “SADIR: Shape-aware diffusion models for 3D image reconstruction,” Shape in Medical Imaging , 2023. [48] L. Zhang, M. Wu, L. Wang, D. C. Steffens, G. G. Potter, and M. Liu, “Iterative learning for joint image denoising and motion artifact correction of 3D brain MRI,” Medical image analysis , 2026, pMID: 41274083. [49] S. Bash, L. Wang, C. Airriess, G. Zaharchuk, E. Gong, A. Shankaranarayanan, and L. N. Tanenbaum, “Deep learning enables 60% accelerated volumetric brain MRI while pre-serving quantitative performance: A prospective, multicenter, multireader trial,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology ,2021, pMID: 34824098. [50] U.S. Food and Drug Administration, Health Canada, and Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency, “Good machine learning practice for medical device development: Guiding principles,” Joint guiding principles, October 2021, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices/software-medical-devic e-samd/good-machine-learning-practice-medical-device-dev elopment-guiding-principles [51] European Parliament and Council of the European Union, “Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act),” Official Journal of the European Union, 12 July 2024, 2024. [52] ——, “Regulation (EU) 2017/745 on medical devices (Medical Device Regulation),” Official Journal of the European Union, L 117, 5 May 2017, 2017. [53] E. Shimron, J. I. Tamir, K. Wang, and M. Lustig, “Implicit data crimes: Machine learning bias arising from misuse of public data,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 119, no. 13, p. e2117203119, 2022. [54] E. A. Gardner, J. H. Ellis, R. J. Hyde, A. M. Aisen, D. J. Quint, and P. L. Carson, “Detection of degradation of magnetic resonance (MR) images: comparison of an automated MR image-quality analysis system with trained human observers,” 

Academic radiology , 1995, pMID: 9419562. [55] Y. Cao and D. Levin, “Using an image database to constrain the acquisition and reconstruction of MR images of the human head,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 1995. [56] A. Fadeev, N. Eltonsy, G. Tourassi, and A. Elmaghraby, “Quality evaluation of fast morphing interpolation model for 3D volume reconstruction,” Proceedings of the Fifth IEEE In-ternational Symposium on Signal Processing and Information Technology, 2005. , 2005. [57] M. D. Tisdall and M. S. Atkins, “Using human and model per-formance to compare MRI reconstructions,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 2006, pMID: 17117780. [58] J. Miao, F. Huang, S. Narayan, and D. L. Wilson, “A new perceptual difference model for diagnostically relevant quanti-tative image quality evaluation: a preliminary study,” Magnetic resonance imaging , 2013, pMID: 23218792. [59] L. Ning, F. Laun, Y. Gur, E. V. R. DiBella, S. Deslauriers-Gauthier, T. Megherbi, A. Ghosh, M. Zucchelli, G. Menegaz, R. Fick, S. St-Jean, M. Paquette, R. Aranda, M. Descoteaux, 25 

R. Deriche, L. O’Donnell, and Y. Rathi, “Sparse reconstruction challenge for diffusion MRI: Validation on a physical phantom to determine which acquisition scheme and analysis method to use?” Medical image analysis , 2015, pMID: 26606457. [60] S. Elhabian, C. Vachet, J. Piven, M. Styner, and G. Gerig, “Compressive sensing based q-space resampling for handling fast bulk motion in hardi acquisitions,” 2016 IEEE 13th International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) , 2016. [61] L. M. Lacerda, J. I. Sperl, M. I. Menzel, T. Sprenger, G. J. Barker, and F. Dell’Acqua, “Diffusion in realistic biophysical systems can lead to aliasing effects in diffusion spectrum imag-ing,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2016, pMID: 26714794. [62] B. Zahneisen, B. Keating, A. Singh, M. Herbst, and T. Ernst, “Reverse retrospective motion correction,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2016, pMID: 26140504. [63] S. S. Gurbani, E. Schreibmann, A. A. Maudsley, J. S. Cordova, B. J. Soher, H. Poptani, G. Verma, P. B. Barker, H. Shim, and L. A. D. Cooper, “A convolutional neural network to filter artifacts in spectroscopic MRI,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2018, pMID: 29520831. [64] I. Fantini, L. Rittner, C. Yasuda, and R. Lotufo, “Automatic detection of motion artifacts on MRI using deep CNN,” 2018 International Workshop on Pattern Recognition in Neuroimag-ing (PRNI) , 2018. [65] M. E. Osadebey, M. Pedersen, D. L. Arnold, and K. E. Wendel-Mitoraj, “Blind blur assessment of MRI images using parallel multiscale difference of gaussian filters,” Biomedical engineering online , 2018, pMID: 29898715. [66] B. B. Risk, M. C. Kociuba, and D. B. Rowe, “Impacts of si-multaneous multislice acquisition on sensitivity and specificity in fMRI,” NeuroImage , 2018, pMID: 29408461. [67] H. Tang, N. Hu, Y. Yuan, C. Xia, X. Liu, P. Zuo, A. F. Stalder, M. Schmidt, X. Zhou, B. Song, and J. Sun, “Accelerated time-of-flight magnetic resonance angiography with sparse undersampling and iterative reconstruction for the evaluation of intracranial arteries,” Korean journal of radiology , 2019, pMID: 30672166. [68] C. Zhao, M. Shao, A. Carass, H. Li, B. E. Dewey, L. M. Ellingsen, J. Woo, M. A. Guttman, A. M. Blitz, M. Stone, P. A. Calabresi, H. Halperin, and J. L. Prince, “Applications of a deep learning method for anti-aliasing and super-resolution in MRI,” Magnetic resonance imaging , 2019, pMID: 31247254. [69] S. J. Sujit, I. Coronado, A. Kamali, P. A. Narayana, and R. E. Gabr, “Automated image quality evaluation of structural brain MRI using an ensemble of deep learning networks,” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2019, pMID: 30811739. [70] J. E. Vranic, N. M. Cross, Y. Wang, D. S. Hippe, E. d. Weerdt, and M. Mossa-Basha, “Compressed sensing-sensitivity encod-ing (cs-SENSE) accelerated brain imaging: Reduced scan time without reduced image quality,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2019, pMID: 30523142. [71] C. Glessgen, D. Gallichan, M. Moor, N. Hainc, and C. Federau, “Evaluation of 3D fat-navigator based retrospective motion correction in the clinical setting of patients with brain tumors,” 

Neuroradiology , 2019, pMID: 30671618. [72] A. Hagiwara, Y. Otsuka, M. Hori, Y. Tachibana, K. Yokoyama, S. Fujita, C. Andica, K. Kamagata, R. Irie, S. Koshino, T. Maekawa, L. Chougar, A. Wada, M. Y. Takemura, N. Hat-tori, and S. Aoki, “Improving the quality of synthetic FLAIR images with deep learning using a conditional generative ad-versarial network for pixel-by-pixel image translation,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2019, pMID: 30630834. [73] M. W. Haskell, S. F. Cauley, B. Bilgic, J. Hossbach, D. N. Splitthoff, J. Pfeuffer, K. Setsompop, and L. L. Wald, “Net-work accelerated motion estimation and reduction (namer): Convolutional neural network guided retrospective motion cor-rection using a separable motion model,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2019, pMID: 31045278. [74] S. Bollmann, M. H. Kristensen, M. S. Larsen, M. V. Olsen, M. J. Pedersen, L. R. Østergaard, K. O’Brien, C. Langkammer, A. Fazlollahi, and M. Barth, “Sharqnet - sophisticated har-monic artifact reduction in quantitative susceptibility mapping using a deep convolutional neural network,” Zeitschrift fur medizinische Physik , 2019, pMID: 30773331. [75] N. M. H. Elsaid and Y.-C. Wu, “Super-resolution diffusion tensor imaging using srcnn: A feasibility study,” Annual In-ternational Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Bi-ology Society. Annual International Conference , 2019, pMID: 31946482. [76] A. J. V. Benjamin, W. Bano, G. Mair, G. Thompson, A. Casado, C. D. Perri, M. Davies, and I. Marshall, “Di-agnostic quality assessment of ir-prepared 3D magnetic res-onance neuroimaging accelerated using compressed sensing and k-space sampling order optimization,” Magnetic resonance imaging , 2020, pMID: 32890675. [77] N. Hampe, U. Katscher, C. A. T. v. d. Berg, K. K. Tha, and S. Mandija, “Investigating the challenges and generalizability of deep learning brain conductivity mapping,” Physics in medicine and biology , 2020, pMID: 32408291. [78] T. Vanderhasselt, M. Naeyaert, N. Watt´ e, G. Allemeersch, S. Raeymaeckers, J. Dudink, J. d. Mey, and H. Raeymaekers, “Synthetic MRI of preterm infants at term-equivalent age: Evaluation of diagnostic image quality and automated brain volume segmentation,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradi-ology , 2020, pMID: 32299803. [79] C. Zhang, S. Klein, A. Cristobal-Huerta, J. A. Hernandez-Tamames, and D. H. J. Poot, “Apir4emc: Autocalibrated par-allel imaging reconstruction for extended multi-contrast imag-ing,” Magnetic resonance imaging , 2021, pMID: 33592248. [80] J. Ding, Y. Duan, Z. Zhuo, Y. Yuan, G. Zhang, Q. Song, B. Gao, B. Zhang, M. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Hou, J. Yuan, C. Feng, J. Wang, L. Lin, and Y. Liu, “Acceleration of brain tof-mra with compressed sensitivity encoding: A multicenter clinical study,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology ,2021, pMID: 33858820. [81] J. R. Harper, V. Cherukuri, T. O’Reilly, M. Yu, E. Mbabazi-Kabachelor, R. Mulando, K. N. Sheth, A. G. Webb, B. C. Warf, A. V. Kulkarni, V. Monga, and S. J. Schiff, “Assessing the utility of low resolution brain imaging: treatment of infant hy-drocephalus,” NeuroImage. Clinical , 2021, pMID: 34911199. [82] S. T. M. Duong, S. L. Phung, A. Bouzerdoum, S. P. Ang, and M. M. Schira, “Correcting susceptibility artifacts of MRI sensors in brain scanning: A 3D anatomy-guided deep learn-ing approach,” Sensors (Basel, Switzerland) , 2021, pMID: 33810289. [83] H. Sagawa, Y. Fushimi, S. Nakajima, K. Fujimoto, K. K. Miyake, H. Numamoto, K. Koizumi, M. Nambu, H. Kataoka, Y. Nakamoto, and T. Saga, “Deep learning-based noise re-duction for fast volume diffusion tensor imaging: Assessing the noise reduction effect and reliability of diffusion metrics,” 

Magnetic resonance in medical sciences : MRMS : an official journal of Japan Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine ,2021, pMID: 32963184. [84] S. K. Kang, S. A. Shin, S. Seo, M. S. Byun, D. Y. Lee, Y. K. Kim, D. S. Lee, and J. S. Lee, “Deep learning-based 3D inpainting of brain MR images,” Scientific Reports , 2021. [85] D. Karimi, C. Jaimes, F. Machado-Rivas, L. Vasung, S. Khan, S. K. Warfield, and A. Gholipour, “Deep learning-based pa-rameter estimation in fetal diffusion-weighted MRI,” NeuroIm-age , 2021, pMID: 34455242. [86] M. Dieckmeyer, A. G. Roy, J. Senapati, C. Wachinger, L. Grundl, J. D¨ opfert, P. F. Bertran, A. Lemke, C. Zimmer, J. S. Kirschke, and D. M. Hedderich, “Effect of MRI acquisition acceleration via compressed sensing and parallel imaging on brain volumetry,” Magma (New York, N.Y.) , 2021, pMID: 33502667. [87] Y. Hu, Y. Xu, Q. Tian, F. Chen, X. Shi, C. J. Moran, B. L. 26 

Daniel, and B. A. Hargreaves, “Run-up: Accelerated multishot diffusion-weighted MRI reconstruction using an unrolled net-work with u-net as priors,” Magnetic resonance in medicine ,2021, pMID: 32783339. [88] B. A. Duffy, L. Zhao, F. Sepehrband, J. Min, D. J. Wang, Y. Shi, A. W. Toga, H. Kim, and A. D. N. Initiative, “Retro-spective motion artifact correction of structural MRI images using deep learning improves the quality of cortical surface reconstructions,” NeuroImage , 2021, pMID: 33460797. [89] S. Kim and S. Park, “Simultaneous multislice brain MRI t1 mapping with improved low-rank modeling,” Tomography (Ann Arbor, Mich.) , 2021, pMID: 34698294. [90] Y. Gao, X. Zhu, B. A. Moffat, R. Glarin, A. H. Wilman, G. B. Pike, S. Crozier, F. Liu, and H. Sun, “xqsm: quantitative susceptibility mapping with octave convolutional and noise-regularized neural networks,” NMR in biomedicine , 2021, pMID: 33368705. [91] C. Zhang, D. Karkalousos, P.-L. Bazin, B. F. Coolen, H. Vrenken, J.-J. Sonke, B. U. Forstmann, D. H. J. Poot, and M. W. A. Caan, “A unified model for reconstruction and r2* mapping of accelerated 7t data using the quantitative recurrent inference machine,” NeuroImage , 2022, pMID: 36240989. [92] M. V. W. Zibetti, F. Knoll, and R. R. Regatte, “Alternating learning approach for variational networks and undersampling pattern in parallel MRI applications,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging , 2022. [93] J. Conklin, M. G. F. Longo, A. Tabari, A. L. G. Filho, W. Liu, D. N. Splitthoff, W.-C. Lo, S. F. Cauley, K. Setsompop, P. W. Schaefer, J. E. Kirsch, O. Rapalino, and S. Y. Huang, “Clinical validation of wave-caipi susceptibility-weighted imaging for routine brain MRI at 1.5 t,” European radiology , 2022, pMID: 35925387. [94] H. Sheng, X. Wang, M. Jiang, and Z. Zhang, “Deep learning-based diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of ischemic penumbra in early cerebral infarction,” 

Contrast media & molecular imaging , 2022, pMID: 35291425. [95] J. Huang, G. Zhou, Z. Yu, and W. Hu, “[deep parallel MRI reconstruction based on a complex-valued loss function],” Nan fang yi ke da xue xue bao = Journal of Southern Medical University , 2022, pMID: 36651242. [96] J. P. Begnoche, K. G. Schilling, B. D. Boyd, L. Y. Cai, W. D. Taylor, and B. A. Landman, “Epi susceptibility cor-rection introduces significant differences far from local areas of high distortion,” Magnetic resonance imaging , 2022, pMID: 35644448. [97] B. Sannananja, C. Zhu, C. G. Colip, A. Somasundaram, M. Ibrahim, T. Khrisat, and M. Mossa-Basha, “Image-quality assessment of 3D intracranial vessel wall MRI using dante or dante-caipi for blood suppression and imaging acceleration,” 

AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2022, pMID: 35618420. [98] K. Yasaka, H. Akai, H. Sugawara, T. Tajima, M. Akahane, N. Yoshioka, H. Kabasawa, R. Miyo, K. Ohtomo, O. Abe, and S. Kiryu, “Impact of deep learning reconstruction on intracranial 1.5 t magnetic resonance angiography,” Japanese journal of radiology , 2022, pMID: 34851499. [99] I. Muro, S. Shimizu, and H. Tsukamoto, “[improvement of motion artifacts in brain MRI using deep learning by simu-lation training data],” Nihon Hoshasen Gijutsu Gakkai zasshi ,2022, pMID: 35046218. [100] C. M. Pirkl, M. Cencini, J. W. Kurzawski, D. Waldmannstetter, H. Li, A. Sekuboyina, S. Endt, L. Peretti, G. Donatelli, R. Pasquariello, M. Costagli, G. Buonincontri, M. Tosetti, M. I. Menzel, and B. H. Menze, “Learning residual motion correc-tion for fast and robust 3D multiparametric MRI,” Medical image analysis , 2022, pMID: 35180675. [101] Q. Yang, Y. Lin, J. Wang, J. Bao, X. Wang, L. Ma, Z. Zhou, Q. Yang, S. Cai, H. He, C. Cai, J. Dong, J. Cheng, Z. Chen, and J. Zhong, “Model-based synthetic data-driven learning (most-dl): Application in single-shot t2 mapping with severe head motion using overlapping-echo acquisition,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 2022, pMID: 35657830. [102] X. Ma, K. U˘ gurbil, and X. Wu, “Mitigating transmit-b1 artifacts by predicting parallel transmission images with deep learning: A feasibility study using high-resolution whole-brain diffusion at 7 tesla,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2022, pMID: 35403237. [103] N. Yoshida, H. Kageyama, H. Akai, K. Yasaka, H. Sugawara, Y. Okada, and A. Kunimatsu, “Motion correction in MR image for analysis of vsrad using generative adversarial network,” 

PloS one , 2022, pMID: 36103561. [104] G. McIlvain, “Quantitative effects of off-resonance related dis-tortion on brain mechanical property estimation with magnetic resonance elastography,” NMR in Biomedicine , 2022. [105] S. Kamesh Iyer, B. F. Moon, N. Josselyn, R. M. Kurtz, J. W. Song, J. B. Ware, S. A. Nabavizadeh, and W. R. Witschey, “Quantitative susceptibility mapping using plug-and-play al-ternating direction method of multipliers,” Scientific Reports ,2022. [106] Y. Sui, O. Afacan, C. Jaimes, A. Gholipour, and S. K. Warfield, “Scan-specific generative neural network for MRI super-resolution reconstruction,” IEEE Transactions on Medi-cal Imaging , 2022. [107] Y. Hu, X. Zhang, D. Chen, Z. Yan, X. Shen, G. Yan, L. Ou-Yang, J. Lin, J. Dong, and X. Qu, “Spatiotemporal flexible sparse reconstruction for rapid dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI,” IEEE transactions on bio-medical engineering , 2022, pMID: 34166181. [108] K. Pawar, Z. Chen, N. J. Shah, and G. F. Egan, “Suppressing motion artefacts in MRI using an inception-resnet network with motion simulation augmentation,” NMR in biomedicine ,2022, pMID: 31865624. [109] Y. Qiao and Y. Shi, “Unsupervised deep learning for fod-based susceptibility distortion correction in diffusion MRI,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 2022, pMID: 34882551. [110] M. Lang, A. Tabari, D. Polak, J. Ford, B. Clifford, W. Lo, K. Manzoor, D. N. Splitthoff, L. L. Wald, O. Rapalino, P. Schaefer, J. Conklin, S. Cauley, and S. Y. Huang, “Clin-ical evaluation of scout accelerated motion estimation and reduction technique for 3D MR imaging in the inpatient and emergency department settings,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2023, pMID: 36702502. [111] S. J. M¨ uller, E. Khadhraoui, D. Voit, C. H. Riedel, J. Frahm, J. M. Romero, and M. Ernst, “Comparison of epi DWI and steam DWI in early postoperative MRI controls after resection of tumors of the central nervous system,” Clinical Neuroradi-ology , 2023. [112] X. Chen, Z. Peng, and G. H. Valadez, “Dd-cisenet: Dual-domain cross-iteration squeeze and excitation network for accelerated MRI reconstruction,” arXiv.org , 2023. [113] R. Pizarro, H.-E. Assemlal, S. K. B. Jegathambal, T. Jubault, S. Antel, D. Arnold, and A. Shmuel, “Deep learning, data ramping, and uncertainty estimation for detecting artifacts in large, imbalanced databases of MRI images,” Medical image analysis , 2023, pMID: 37797482. [114] J. Hossbach, D. N. Splitthoff, S. Cauley, B. Clifford, D. Polak, W.-C. Lo, H. Meyer, and A. Maier, “Deep learning-based mo-tion quantification from k-space for fast model-based magnetic resonance imaging motion correction,” Medical physics , 2023, pMID: 36433748. [115] Z. Li, Q. Fan, B. Bilgic, G. Wang, W. Wu, J. R. Polimeni, K. L. Miller, S. Y. Huang, and Q. Tian, “Diffusion MRI data analysis assisted by deep learning synthesized anatomical images (deepanat),” Medical image analysis , 2023, pMID: 36867912. [116] S. Shan, Y. Gao, P. Z. Y. Liu, B. Whelan, H. Sun, B. Dong, F. Liu, and D. E. J. Waddington, “Distortion-corrected image reconstruction with deep learning on an MRI-linac,” Magnetic 27 

resonance in medicine , 2023, pMID: 37125656. [117] C. Thaler, J. Sedlacik, N. D. Forkert, J.-P. Stellmann, G. Sch¨ on, J. Fiehler, and S. Gellißen, “Effect of geometric distortion correction on thickness and volume measurements of cortical parcellations in 3D t1w gradient echo sequences,” PloS one ,2023, pMID: 37058493. [118] K. Usui, I. Muro, S. Shibukawa, M. Goto, K. Ogawa, Y. Sakano, S. Kyogoku, and H. Daida, “Evaluation of motion artefact reduction depending on the artefacts’ directions in head MRI using conditional generative adversarial networks,” 

Scientific reports , 2023, pMID: 37237139. [119] T. Ciceri, L. Squarcina, A. Pigoni, A. Ferro, F. Montano, A. Bertoldo, N. Persico, S. Boito, F. M. Triulzi, G. Conte, P. Brambilla, and D. Peruzzo, “Geometric reliability of super-resolution reconstructed images from clinical fetal MRI in the second trimester,” Neuroinformatics , 2023, pMID: 37284977. [120] G. Ramos-Llord´ en, R. A. Lobos, T. H. Kim, Q. Tian, T. Witzel, H.-H. Lee, A. Scholz, B. Keil, A. Yendiki, B. Bilgic ¸, J. P. Haldar, and S. Y. Huang, “High-fidelity, high-spatial-resolution diffusion magnetic resonance imaging of ex vivo whole human brain at ultra-high gradient strength with structured low-rank echo-planar imaging ghost correction,” NMR in biomedicine ,2023, pMID: 36106429. [121] Y. Ji, W. Wu, M. H. S. d. Buck, T. Okell, and P. Jezzard, “Highly accelerated intracranial time-of-flight magnetic reso-nance angiography using wave-encoding,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2023, pMID: 37010811. [122] A. Simk´ o, S. Ruiter, T. L¨ ofstedt, A. Garpebring, T. Nyholm, M. Bylund, and J. Jonsson, “Improving MR image quality with a multi-task model, using convolutional losses,” BMC medical imaging , 2023, pMID: 37784039. [123] Y. Jiang, S. Zhang, and J. Chi, “Multi-modal brain tumor data completion based on reconstruction consistency loss,” Journal of digital imaging , 2023, pMID: 36856903. [124] A. Tabari, M. Lang, K. Awan, W. Liu, B. Clifford, W.-C. Lo, D. N. Splitthoff, S. Cauley, O. Rapalino, P. Schaefer, S. Y. Huang, and J. Conklin, “Optimized flow compensation for contrast-enhanced t1-weighted wave-caipi 3D mprage imaging of the brain,” European radiology experimental , 2023, pMID: 37394534. [125] K. Yilmaz, T. C ¸ ukur, and V. M. Patel, “Self-supervised MRI reconstruction with unrolled diffusion models,” Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2023 , 2023. [126] C. J. Wang, N. S. Rost, and P. Golland, “Spatial-intensity transforms for medical image-to-image translation,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 2023, pMID: 37285247. [127] L. Beljaards, N. Pezzotti, C. Rao, M. Doneva, M. J. P. v. Osch, and M. Staring, “AI-based motion artifact severity estimation in undersampled MRI allowing for selection of appropriate reconstruction models,” Medical physics , 2024, pMID: 38167996. [128] I. I. Giannakopoulos, M. J. Muckley, J. Kim, M. Breen, P. M. Johnson, Y. W. Lui, and R. Lattanzi, “Accelerated MRI reconstructions via variational network and feature domain learning,” Scientific Reports , 2024. [129] S. Dolui, Z. Wang, R. L. Wolf, A. Nabavizadeh, L. Xie, D. To-sun, I. M. Nasrallah, D. A. Wolk, J. A. Detre, and A. D. N. Initiative, “Automated quality evaluation index for arterial spin labeling derived cerebral blood flow maps,” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2024, pMID: 38400805. [130] H.-Y. Heo, M. Singh, V. Yedavalli, S. Jiang, and J. Zhou, “Cest and nuclear overhauser enhancement imaging with deep learning-extrapolated semisolid magnetization transfer reference: Scan-rescan reproducibility and reliability studies,” 

Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2024, pMID: 38009996. [131] A. Karthik, K. Aggarwal, A. Kapoor, D. Singh, L. Hu, A. Gandhamal, and D. Kumar, “Comprehensive assessment of imaging quality of artificial intelligence-assisted compressed sensing-based MR images in routine clinical settings,” BMC medical imaging , 2024, pMID: 39434010. [132] J. Lee, W. Jung, S. Yang, J. H. Park, I. Hwang, J. W. Chung, S. H. Choi, and K. S. Choi, “Deep learning-based super-resolution and denoising algorithm improves reliability of dynamic contrast-enhanced MRI in diffuse glioma,” Scientific reports , 2024, pMID: 39455814. [133] D. Uher, G. S. Drenthen, B. A. Poser, P. A. M. Hofman, L. G. Wagner, R. H. G. J. v. Lanen, C. M. Hoeberigs, A. J. Colon, O. E. M. G. Schijns, J. F. A. Jansen, and W. H. Backes, “Deepflair: A neural network approach to mitigate signal and contrast loss in temporal lobes at 7 tesla FLAIR images,” 

Magnetic resonance imaging , 2024, pMID: 38621552. [134] W. Bian, A. Jang, and F. Liu, “Improving quantitative MRI using self-supervised deep learning with model reinforcement: Demonstration for rapid t1 mapping,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2024, pMID: 38342980. [135] K. Yasaka, H. Akai, S. Kato, T. Tajima, N. Yoshioka, T. Furuta, H. Kageyama, Y. Toda, M. Akahane, K. Ohtomo, O. Abe, and S. Kiryu, “Iterative motion correction technique with deep learning reconstruction for brain MRI: A volunteer and patient study,” Journal of imaging informatics in medicine , 2024, pMID: 38942939. [136] V. K. Trivedi, B. Sharma, and P. Balamurugan, “Mcddpm: Multichannel conditional denoising diffusion model for unsu-pervised anomaly detection in brain MRI,” 2024 17th Interna-tional Congress on Image and Signal Processing, BioMedical Engineering and Informatics (CISP-BMEI) , 2024. [137] Q. Ma, Z. Lai, Z. Wang, Y. Qiu, H. Zhang, and X. Qu, “MRI reconstruction with enhanced self-similarity using graph convolutional network,” BMC medical imaging , 2024, pMID: 38760778. [138] A. Kofler, K. M. Kerkering, L. G¨ oschel, A. Fillmer, and C. Kolbitsch, “Quantitative MR image reconstruction using parameter-specific dictionary learning with adaptive dictionary-size and sparsity-level choice,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , 2024. [139] N. Gil, A. Tabari, W.-C. Lo, B. Clifford, M. Lang, K. Awan, K. Gaudet, D. N. Splitthoff, D. Polak, S. Cauley, and S. Y. Huang, “Quantitative evaluation of scout accelerated motion estimation and reduction (samer) mprage for morphometric analysis of brain tissue in patients undergoing evaluation for memory loss,” NeuroImage , 2024, pMID: 39349147. [140] Z. Qiu, S. Hu, W. Zhao, K. Sakaie, J. E. P. Sun, M. A. Griswold, D. K. Jones, and D. Ma, “Self-calibrated subspace reconstruction for multidimensional MR fingerprinting for si-multaneous relaxation and diffusion quantification,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2024, pMID: 38102776. [141] H. Olsson, J. M. Millward, L. Starke, T. Gladytz, T. Klein, J. Fehr, W.-C. Lai, C. Lippert, T. Niendorf, and S. Waiczies, “Simulating rigid head motion artifacts on brain magnitude MRI data-outcome on image quality and segmentation of the cerebral cortex,” PloS one , 2024, pMID: 38626138. [142] G. Rizzuti, T. Schakel, N. R. F. Huttinga, J. W. Dankbaar, T. v. Leeuwen, and A. Sbrizzi, “Towards retrospective motion correction and reconstruction for clinical 3D brain MRI pro-tocols with a reference contrast,” Magma (New York, N.Y.) ,2024, pMID: 38758490. [143] S. Altmann, N. F. Grauhan, L. Brockstedt, M. Kondova, I. Schmidtmann, R. Paul, B. Clifford, T. Feiweier, Z. Hosseini, T. Uphaus, S. Groppa, M. A. Brockmann, and A. E. Othman, “Ultrafast brain MRI with deep learning reconstruction for suspected acute ischemic stroke,” Radiology , 2024, pMID: 38376403. [144] Y. Jun, Y. Arefeen, J. Cho, S. Fujita, X. Wang, P. E. Grant, B. Gagoski, C. Jaimes, M. S. Gee, and B. Bilgic, “Zero-deepsub: Zero-shot deep subspace reconstruction for rapid multiparametric quantitative MRI using 3D-qalas,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2024, pMID: 38282270. 28 

[145] S. Feizollah and C. L. Tardif, “3D mermaid: 3D multi-shot enhanced recovery motion artifact insensitive diffusion for submillimeter, multi-shell, and snr-efficient diffusion imaging,” 

Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 40035173. [146] Y. W. Park, R.-E. Yoo, I. Shin, Y. H. Jeon, K. P. Singh, M. D. Lee, S. Kim, K. Yang, G. Jeong, L. Ryu, K. Han, S. S. Ahn, S.-K. Lee, R. Jain, and S. H. Choi, “A multinational study of deep learning-based image enhancement for multiparametric glioma MRI,” Scientific Reports , 2025. [147] M. Safari, S. Wang, Z. Eidex, R. L. J. Qiu, C.-W. Chang, D. S. Yu, and X. Yang, “A physics-informed deep learning model for MRI brain motion correction,” Medical physics , 2025, pMID: 41395855. [148] D. Zhu, F. Xu, D. Liu, and Q. Qin, “A straightforward approach for 3D single-shot arterial spin labeling-based brain perfusion imaging: Preventing artifacts due to signal fluctuations,” Mag-netic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 39887515. [149] N. Nishioka, Y. Shimizu, Y. Kaneko, T. Shirai, A. Suzuki, T. Amemiya, H. Ochi, Y. Bito, M. Takizawa, Y. Ikebe, H. Kameda, T. Harada, N. Fujima, and K. Kudo, “Accelerating FLAIR imaging via deep learning reconstruction: potential for evaluating white matter hyperintensities,” Japanese journal of radiology , 2025, pMID: 39316286. [150] Y. Wen, H. Ma, S. Xiang, Z. Feng, C. Guan, and X. Li, “Accel-erating brain t2-weighted imaging using artificial intelligence-assisted compressed sensing combined with deep learning-based reconstruction: a feasibility study at 5.0t MRI,” BMC medical imaging , 2025, pMID: 40596927. [151] E. Marchetto, H. Eichhorn, D. Gallichan, J. A. Schnabel, and M. Ganz, “Agreement of image quality metrics with radiological evaluation in the presence of motion artifacts,” 

Magma (New York, N.Y.) , 2025, pMID: 40493331. [152] Z. Liu, X. Zhou, S. Tao, J. Ma, D. Nickel, P. Liebig, M. Mostapha, V. Patel, E. M. Westerhold, H. Mojahed, V. Gupta, and E. H. Middlebrooks, “Application of deep learning accelerated image reconstruction in t2-weighted turbo spin-echo imaging of the brain at 7t,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2025, pMID: 39832954. [153] E. B. Bjørkeli, J. T. Geitung, and M. Esmaeili, “Artificial intelligence-powered four-fold upscaling of human brain syn-thetic metabolite maps,” The Journal of international medical research , 2025, pMID: 40257058. [154] P. Angella, V. P. Pastore, and M. Santacesaria, “Assessing the use of diffusion models for motion artifact correction in brain MRI,” 2025 IEEE 22nd International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) , 2025. [155] J. N. Nonninger, P. Kienast, I. Pogledic, A. Mallouhi, F. Barkhof, S. Trattnig, S. D. Robinson, G. Kasprian, and L. Haider, “Assessment of AI-accelerated t2-weighted brain MRI, based on clinical ratings and image quality evaluation,” 

European journal of radiology , 2025, pMID: 40315626. [156] M. S. Hosseini, S. M. R. Aghamiri, A. F. Ardekani, S. M. BagheriMofidi, and M. Safari, “Autocornn: An unsupervised physics-aware deep learning model for geometric distortion correction of brain MRI images towards MR-only stereotactic radiosurgery,” Journal of imaging informatics in medicine ,2025, pMID: 39080159. [157] U. Yarach, I. Chatnuntawech, C. Liao, S. Teerapittayanon, S. S. Iyer, T. H. Kim, J. Haldar, J. Cho, B. Bilgic, Y. Hu, B. Hargreaves, and K. Setsompop, “Blip-up blip-down circular epi (buda-cepi) for distortion-free dmri with rapid unrolled deep learning reconstruction,” Magnetic resonance imaging ,2025, pMID: 39566835. [158] S. You, A. Gondova, C. S. A. Izaguirre, G. T. Milo, S. Jeong, H.-J. Lee, T. Tarui, C. K. Rollins, H. J. Yun, P. E. Grant, and K. Im, “Conditional deep generative normative modeling for structural and developmental anomaly detection in the fetal brain,” NeuroImage , 2025, pMID: 40912664. [159] P. Zhu, C. Liu, Y. Fu, N. Chen, and A. Qiu, “Cycle-conditional diffusion model for noise correction of diffusion-weighted images using unpaired data,” Medical image analysis , 2025, pMID: 40273728. [160] M. Kharaji, G. Canton, Y. Guo, M. H. Mosi, Z. Zhou, N. Balu, and M. Mossa-Basha, “Dante-caipi accelerated contrast-enhanced 3D t1: Deep learning-based image quality improvement for vessel wall MRI,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2025, pMID: 39038956. [161] P. Angella, L. Balbi, F. Ferrando, P. Traverso, R. Varriale, V. P. Pastore, and M. Santacesaria, “Dima: Diffusing motion artifacts for unsupervised correction in brain MRI images,” 

IEEE Access , 2025. [162] L. C. Liebrand, D. Karkalousos, ´E. Poirion, B. J. Emmer, S. D. Roosendaal, H. A. Marquering, C. B. L. M. Majoie, J. Savatovsky, and M. W. A. Caan, “Deep learning for effi-cient reconstruction of highly accelerated 3D FLAIR MRI in neurological deficits,” Magma (New York, N.Y.) , 2025, pMID: 39212832. [163] G. Mallardi, F. Calefato, F. Lanubile, G. Logroscino, and B. Tafuri, “Diffusion models for neuroimaging data augmen-tation: Assessing realism and clinical relevance,” Journal of Medical Systems , 2025. [164] A. M. Cerjanic, A. M. Diano, and C. L. Johnson, “Elasto-graphic magnetization prepared imaging with rapid encoding,” 

Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 40065646. [165] H. Yoo, H. E. Moon, S. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y. H. Choi, J.-E. Cheon, J. S. Lee, and S. Lee, “Evaluation of image quality and scan time efficiency in accelerated 3D t1-weighted pediatric brain MRI using deep learning-based reconstruction,” Korean journal of radiology , 2025, pMID: 39898398. [166] S. Nimje, T. Arti` eres, M. Guye, and L. de Rochefort, “Insights on scan-specific deep-learning strategies for brain MRI parallel imaging reconstruction,” NMR in Biomedicine , vol. 38, no. 4, p. e70079, 2025, pMID: 40545734. [167] C. Mercier, S. Faisan, A. Pron, N. Girard, G. Auzias, T. Chonavel, and F. Rousseau, “Intersection-based slice motion estimation for fetal brain imaging,” Computers in biology and medicine , 2025, pMID: 40112563. [168] M. Singh, S. Z. Mahmud, V. Yedavalli, J. Zhou, D. O. Kamson, P. v. Zijl, and H.-Y. Heo, “Learning-based motion artifact correction in the z-spectral domain for chemical exchange saturation transfer MRI,” Magnetic resonance in medicine ,2025, pMID: 39834104. [169] C. Raymond, J. Yao, B. Clifford, T. Feiweier, S. Oshima, D. Telesca, X. Zhong, H. Meyer, R. G. Everson, N. Salamon, T. F. Cloughesy, and B. M. Ellingson, “Leveraging physics-based synthetic MR images and deep transfer learning for artifact reduction in echo-planar imaging,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2025, pMID: 39947682. [170] A. Taymourtash, E. Schwartz, K.-H. Nenning, R. Licandro, P. Kienast, V. Hielle, D. Prayer, G. Kasprian, and G. Langs, “Measuring the effects of motion corruption in fetal fMRI,” 

Human brain mapping , 2025, pMID: 39846325. [171] Y. Karuna, N. Syamala, C. V. Ravikumar, P. Thakur, and S. Saladi, “Modified energy-based GAN for intensity in ho-mogeneity correction in brain MR images,” Scientific reports ,2025, pMID: 40691452. [172] F. Goffi, A. M. Bianchi, G. Schiena, P. Brambilla, and E. Mag-gioni, “Multi-metric approach for the comparison of denoising techniques for resting-state fMRI,” Human brain mapping ,2025, pMID: 40309965. [173] R. Byanju, S. Klein, A. Cristobal-Huerta, J. A. Hernandez-Tamames, and D. H. J. Poot, “Myelin water imaging from accelerated 3D-grase acquisitions using subspace constrained reconstruction,” Magma (New York, N.Y.) , 2025, pMID: 40679773. [174] K. Eeden Risager, T. Gholamalizadeh, and M. Mehdipour Ghazi, “Non-reference quality assessment for medical imaging: Application to synthetic brain mris,” Deep 29 

Generative Models , 2025. [175] L. Chen, J. Lin, G. Fu, P. Yang, and M. Liu, “Pw-GAN: Pseudo-warping field guided GAN for unsupervised denoising of fetal brain MRI images,” bioRxiv , 2025. [176] Y. Li, Y.-P. Liao, J. Wang, W. Lu, and Y. Zhang, “Patient-specific MRI super-resolution via implicit neural represen-tations and knowledge transfer,” Physics in medicine and biology , 2025, pMID: 40064110. [177] S. Rezvani, S. Moazami, C. J. Azevedo, and A. A. Oberai, “Probabilistic brain MR image transformation using generative models,” Scientific Reports , 2025. [178] K. S. Choi, C. Park, J. Y. Lee, K. H. Lee, Y. H. Jeon, I. Hwang, R. E. Yoo, T. J. Yun, M. J. Lee, K.-H. Jung, and K. M. Kang, “Prospective evaluation of accelerated brain MRI using deep learning-based reconstruction: Simultaneous application to 2D spin-echo and 3D gradient-echo sequences,” Korean journal of radiology , 2025, pMID: 39780631. [179] T. Jochmann, F. Salman, M. G. Dwyer, N. Bergsland, R. Zi-vadinov, J. Haueisen, and F. Schweser, “Quantitative sus-ceptibility mapping in magnetically inhomogeneous tissues,” 

Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 40312865. [180] B. D. Wichtmann, C. Katemann, M. Kadrija, Y. C. Layer, L. M. Bischoff, Y. Scheuver, M. Mezger, O. M. We-ber, J. A. Luetkens, U. I. Attenberger, A. Radbruch, and D. Paech, “Rapid and motion-robust pediatric brain imaging: T2-weighted turbo-spin-echo propeller acquisition with com-pressed sensing,” Pediatric radiology , 2025, pMID: 39589491. [181] X. Wang, H. Fan, Z. Tan, S. Vasylechko, E. Yang, R. Didier, O. Afacan, M. Uecker, S. K. Warfield, and A. Gholipour, “Rapid, high-resolution and distortion-free R∗ 

> 2

mapping of fetal brain using multi-echo radial flash and model-based reconstruction,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 40534142. [182] M. Verdicchio, F. Grassi, G. Esposito, C. Cavaliere, V. Alfano, M. Cerrone, S. Pappat` a, E. Salvatore, A. D. Cecca, M. Salva-tore, and M. Aiello, “Reliability assessment of accelerated MR sequences for the estimation of structural and vascular markers in dementia,” Scientific reports , 2025, pMID: 40240759. [183] W. Jung, G. Jeong, S. Kim, I. Hwang, S. H. Choi, Y. H. Jeon, K. S. Choi, J. Y. Lee, R.-E. Yoo, T. J. Yun, and K. M. Kang, “Reliability of brain volume measures of accelerated 3D t1-weighted images with deep learning-based reconstruction,” 

Neuroradiology , 2025, pMID: 39316090. [184] M. Safari, S. Wang, Q. Li, Z. Eidex, R. L. J. Qiu, C.-W. Chang, H. Mao, and X. Yang, “Res-mocodiff: residual-guided diffusion models for motion artifact correction in brain MRI,” 

Physics in medicine and biology , 2025, pMID: 41061726. [185] A. Aali, M. Arvinte, S. Kumar, Y. I. Arefeen, and J. I. Tamir, “Robust multi-coil MRI reconstruction via self-supervised denoising,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 40457510. [186] Z. Dong, T. G. Reese, H.-H. Lee, S. Y. Huang, J. R. Polimeni, L. L. Wald, and F. Wang, “Romer-epti: Rotating-view motion-robust super-resolution epti for snr-efficient distortion-free in-vivo mesoscale diffusion MRI and microstructure imaging,” 

Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 39552568. [187] O. Dabrowski, J.-L. Falcone, A. Klauser, J. Songeon, M. Kocher, B. Chopard, F. Lazeyras, and S. Courvoisier, “Sismik for brain MRI: Deep-learning-based motion estima-tion and model-based motion correction in k-space,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 2025, pMID: 39159019. [188] L. R. Huber, R. Stirnberg, A. T. Morgan, D. A. Feinberg, P. Ehses, L. Knudsen, O. F. Gulban, K. Koiso, I. Gephart, S. Swegle, S. G. Wardle, A. S. Persichetti, A. J. S. Beckett, T. St¨ ocker, N. Boulant, B. A. Poser, and P. A. Bandettini, “Short-term gradient imperfections in high-resolution epi lead to fuzzy ripple artifacts,” Magnetic resonance in medicine ,2025, pMID: 40173320. [189] Y. U. Alc ¸alar and M. Akc ¸akaya, “Sparsity-driven parallel imaging consistency for improved self-supervised MRI re-construction,” 2025 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , 2025. [190] N. Wang, C. Liao, X. Cao, M. Nishimura, Y. W. E. Brackenier, M. Yurt, M. Gao, D. Abraham, C. Alkan, S. S. Iyer, Z. Zhou, H. Jeong, A. Kerr, J. P. Haldar, and K. Setsompop, “Spherical echo-planar time-resolved imaging (septi) for rapid 3D quan-titative t 2 * and susceptibility imaging,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 39250435. [191] B. E. Dewey, S. W. Remedios, M. Sanjayan, N. B. Rjeily, A. Z. Lee, C. Wyche, S. Duncan, J. L. Prince, P. A. Calabresi, K. C. Fitzgerald, and E. M. Mowry, “Super-resolution in clinically available spinal cord mris enables automated atrophy analysis,” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2025, pMID: 39366765. [192] H. Liu, E. Versteeg, M. Fuderer, O. v. d. Heide, M. B. Schilder, C. A. T. v. d. Berg, and A. Sbrizzi, “Time-efficient, high-resolution 3t whole-brain relaxometry using cartesian 3D MR spin tomography in time-domain (MR-stat) with cerebrospinal fluid suppression,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 39607873. [193] G. Bauman, R. Afshari, and O. Bieri, “Ultra-high-resolution brain MRI at 0.55t: bstar and its application to magnetization transfer ratio imaging,” Zeitschrift fur medizinische Physik ,2025, pMID: 39824686. [194] I. Muro, T. Isoiwa, S. Shibukawa, K. Usui, and Y. Otsuka, “Using deep learning to simultaneously reduce noise and motion artifacts in brain MR imaging,” Magnetic resonance in medical sciences : MRMS : an official journal of Japan Society of Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , 2025, pMID: 39938896. [195] Z. Wang, R. Ramasawmy, A. Javed, J. P. Mugler, C. H. Meyer, and A. E. Campbell-Washburn, “Variable-flip-angle 3D spiral-in-out turbo spin-echo imaging using concomitant gradient compensation and echo reordering at 0.55 t,” Magnetic res-onance in medicine , 2025, pMID: 39567364. [196] A. Rauland, S. L. Meisler, A. F. Alexander-Bloch, J. Bagaut-dinova, E. B. Baller, R. E. Gur, R. C. Gur, A. C. Luo, T. M. Moore, O. V. Popovych, K. Reetz, D. R. Roalf, R. T. Shino-hara, S. Sotardi, V. J. Sydnor, A. Vossough, S. B. Eickhoff, M. Cieslak, and T. D. Satterthwaite, “White matter bundle reconstruction from single-shell diffusion magnetic resonance imaging: Test-retest reliability and predictive capability across orientation distribution function reconstruction methods,” Hu-man brain mapping , 2025, pMID: 41376618. [197] H. Liu, Z. Chen, L. H. Law, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Shen, J. Huang, and K. W. Y. Chan, “Accelerating cest MRI through complementary undersampling and multi-offset transformer reconstruction,” Communications Engineer-ing , 2026. [198] Z. Xiong, Y. Gao, F. Liu, D. Emery, K. Butcher, A. H. Wilman, and H. Sun, “Advancing quantitative susceptibility mapping with 2.5d diffusion models for rapid intracranial hemorrhage quantification,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2026, pMID: 41873533. [199] T. Sanchez, V. Zalevskyi, A. Mihailov, G. Mart´ ı Juan, E. Eixarch, A. Jakab, V. Dunet, M. Koob, G. Auzias, and M. Bach Cuadra, “Automatic quality control in multi-centric fetal brain MRI super-resolution reconstruction,” Perinatal, Preterm and Paediatric Image Analysis , 2026. [200] G. Liu, T. Ueguchi, and S. Ogawa, “Block-interleaved seg-mented echo-planar imaging for improved activity detection in submillimeter high-resolution functional MRI at 7 t,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2026, pMID: 40432253. [201] N. G. Lee, S. X. Cui, and K. S. Nayak, “Cartesian maxgirf: Model-based epi reconstruction incorporating gradient nonlin-earity and concomitant field effects,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2026, pMID: 41039908. [202] T. W. Okell, J. G. Woods, and M. Chiew, “Combined an-giography and perfusion using radial imaging and arterial 30 

spin labeling with structural contrast,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2026, pMID: 40955094. [203] E. Marchetto, S. Flassbeck, A. Mao, and J. Assl¨ ander, “Contrast-optimized basis functions for self-navigated mo-tion correction in quantitative MRI,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2026, pMID: 40961378. [204] L. Beljaards, M. Nagtegaal, C. Rao, Y. Dong, M. J. P. v. Osch, N. Pezzotti, M. Doneva, and M. Staring, “Deep-disorder: Motion correction in 3D MRI via segment reconstruction and registration,” NMR in biomedicine , 2026, pMID: 41958180. [205] N. Yoshida, H. Kageyama, H. Akai, K. Sasaki, N. Sakurai, N. Koori, S. Yamamoto, and N. Kodama, “Deep learning approach to super-resolution correction of brain MRI motion artifacts for accurate hippocampal volumetry,” Scientific re-ports , 2026, pMID: 41866419. [206] A. M. Baz, Z. Bendella, C. Katemann, A. M. Sprinkart, K. Weiss, O. M. Weber, J. M. Peeters, N. C. Lehnen, R. Clauberg, J. A. Luetkens, A. Radbruch, and B. D. Wicht-mann, “Deep learning improves image quality in motion-robust and sedation-free pediatric brain MRI,” European radiology ,2026, pMID: 41925834. [207] S. Jeong, “Evaluating reliability of automated quantitative brain morphometry from fetal t2-weighted MRI,” Frontiers in Neuroscience , 2026. [208] B. C. Ho, D. Kim, A. Kumar, S. Weiss, H. Vossler, E. Mormino, G. Zaharchuk, and A. D. N. Initiative, “Eval-uation of image-level harmonization methods for multi-center MR neuroimaging,” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2026, pMID: 41489091. [209] V. B. B. Mello, R. McKinley, R. Wiest, and C. Rummel, “Fast surface reconstruction of human brain MRI: benchmarking deep-learning based morphometry tools,” Scientific reports ,2026, pMID: 42286078. [210] H. Li, M. Chiew, I. Dragonu, P. Jezzard, and T. W. Okell, “Few-shot learning for highly accelerated 3D time-of-flight mra reconstruction,” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2026, pMID: 40931540. [211] B. Kiani Kalejahi, “GAN-based cross-modality brain MRI synthesis: Paired versus unpaired training and comparison with diffusion and transformer models,” Biomimetics , 2026. [212] J. Liu, Q. Lin, Z. Xiong, S. Shan, C. Liu, M. Li, F. Liu, G. B. Pike, H. Sun, and Y. Gao, “Highly undersampled MRI reconstruction via a single posterior sampling of diffusion models,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 2026. [213] M. A. Abed, S. Demir, A. Groteklaes, E. Germani, S. Faghihroohi, H. Sabir, and S. Albarqouni, “Mriqt: Physics-aware diffusion model for image quality transfer in neonatal ultra-low-field MRI,” 2026 IEEE 23rd International Sympo-sium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI) , 2026. [214] A. Ortiz-Gonzalez, E. Kobler, L. Schletter, and A. Effland, “Motiondps: Motion-compensated 3D brain MRI reconstruc-tion,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 2026. [215] S. Zhu, Y. Jin, T. Spears, I. Zawar, and P. T. Fletcher, “Realdeal: Enhancing realism and details in brain image gener-ation via image-to-image diffusion models,” Deep Generative Models , 2026. [216] S. Rassmann, D. Kugler, C. Ewert, and M. Reuter, “Regression is all you need for medical image translation,” IEEE transac-tions on medical imaging , 2026, pMID: 41477795. [217] M. F. Eggl and S. D. Santis, “Simulation-based inference at the theoretical limit for fast, robust microstructural MRI with minimal diffusion data,” Communications Medicine , 2026. [218] K. T. Islam, S. Dayarathna, S. Zhong, P. Zakavi, H. Kav-noudias, S. Farquharson, G. Durbridge, H. Sun, S. Bacchi, G. F. Egan, M. Barth, A. Dwyer, K. L. McMahon, P. M. Parizel, M. Law, and Z. Chen, “Synpoc: a high-quality gen-erative diffusion model for transforming ultra-low-field point-of-care MRI using high-field MRI representations,” Scientific reports , 2026, pMID: 41580445. [219] S. Altmann, N. F. Grauhan, M. A. A. Mercado, H. Almansour, R. H. Paul, V. I. Sch¨ offling, M. Ottenhausen, M. A. Brock-mann, and A. E. Othman, “Ultra-fast sub-minute brain MRI with deep-learning-reconstruction for anesthesia-free emer-gency imaging in children,” Clinical Neuroradiology , 2026. [220] T. Kim, S. Ji, K. Min, M. Kim, J. Youn, C. Oh, J. Kim, and J. Lee, “Vessel segmentation for χ-separation in quantita-tive susceptibility mapping,” Magnetic resonance in medicine ,2026, pMID: 40891385. [221] K. Ryu, Y. Nam, S.-M. Gho, J. Jang, H.-J. Lee, J. Cha, H. J. Baek, J. Park, and D.-H. Kim, “Data-driven synthetic MRI FLAIR artifact correction via deep neural network.” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2019. [222] J. Du, L. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Zhou, Z. He, and Y. Jia, “Brain MRI super-resolution using 3D dilated convolutional encoder–decoder network,” IEEE Access , 2020. [223] P. W. Hales, J. Pfeuffer, and C. A. Clark, “Combined denoising and suppression of transient artifacts in arterial spin labeling MRI using deep learning.” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2020. [224] P. H. Kulkarni, S. N. Merchant, and S. P. Awate, “Dictio-nary+wavelet model with nested-minorized vb-em for sms-caipi r-fMRI reconstruction,” IEEE Open Journal of Signal Processing , 2021. [225] R. Tanno, D. E. Worrall, E. Kaden, A. Ghosh, F. Grussu, A. Bizzi, S. N. Sotiropoulos, A. Criminisi, and D. C. Alexan-der, “Uncertainty modelling in deep learning for safer neuroim-age enhancement: Demonstration in diffusion MRI.” NeuroIm-age , 2021. [226] M. A. Al-Masni, S. Lee, J. Yi, S. Kim, S.-M. Gho, Y. H. Choi, and D.-H. Kim, “Stacked u-nets with self-assisted priors towards robust correction of rigid motion artifact in brain MRI.” NeuroImage , 2022. [227] N. Kanemaru, H. Takao, S. Amemiya, and O. Abe, “The effect of a post-scan processing denoising system on image quality and morphometric analysis.” Journal of neuroradiology = Journal de neuroradiologie , 2022. [228] P. Vakli, B. Weiss, J. Szalma, P. Barsi, I. Gyuricza, P. Ke-menczky, E. Somogyi, ´ Ad´ am N´ arai, V. G´ al, P. Hermann, and Z. Vidny´ anszky, “Automatic brain MRI motion artifact detec-tion based on end-to-end deep learning is similarly effective as traditional machine learning trained on image quality metrics.” 

Medical image analysis , 2023. [229] L. Cordero-Grande, J. E. Ortu˜ no-Fisac, A. A. del Hoyo, A. Uus, M. Deprez, A. Santos, J. V. Hajnal, and M. J. Ledesma-Carbayo, “Fetal MRI by robust deep generative prior reconstruction and diffeomorphic registration,” IEEE Transac-tions on Medical Imaging , 2023. [230] L. Zhou, X. Ni, Y. Kong, H. Zeng, M. Xu, J. Zhou, Q. Wang, and C. Liu, “Mitigating misalignment in MRI-to-CT synthesis for improved synthetic CT generation: an iterative refinement and knowledge distillation approach.” Physics in medicine and biology , 2023. [231] V. Lau, L. Xiao, Y. Zhao, S. Su, Y. Ding, C. Man, X. Wang, A. Tsang, P. Cao, G. K. K. Lau, G. K. K. Leung, A. T. L. Leong, and E. X. Wu, “Pushing the limits of low-cost ultra-low-field MRI by dual-acquisition deep learning 3D superres-olution.” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2023. [232] P. Ernst, S. Chatterjee, G. Rose, O. Speck, and A. N¨ urnberger, “Sinogram upsampling using primal-dual unet for undersam-pled CT and radial MRI reconstruction.” Neural networks : the official journal of the International Neural Network Society ,2023. [233] S. Yuan, Y. Liu, R. Wei, J. Zhu, K. Men, and J. Dai, “A novel loss function to reproduce texture features for deep learning-based MRI-to-CT synthesis.” Medical physics , 2024. [234] A. Wada, T. Akashi, A. Hagiwara, M. Nishizawa, K. Shimoji, J. Kikuta, T. Maekawa, K. Sano, K. Kamagata, A. Nakanishi, and S. Aoki, “Deep learning-driven transformation: A novel 31 

approach for mitigating batch effects in diffusion MRI beyond traditional harmonization.” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2024. [235] M. Hewlett, I. Petrov, P. M. Johnson, and M. Drangova, “Deep-learning-based motion correction using multichannel MRI data: a study using simulated artifacts in the fastmri dataset.” NMR in biomedicine , 2024. [236] K. Xie, L. Gao, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, Q. Xi, F. Zhang, J. Sun, T. Lin, J. Sui, and X. Ni, “GAN-based metal artifacts region inpainting in brain MRI imaging with reflective registration.” 

Medical physics , 2024. [237] Y. H. Moshe, Y. Buchsweiler, M. Teicher, and M. Artzi, “Handling missing MRI data in brain tumors classification tasks: Usage of synthetic images vs. duplicate images and empty images.” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2024. [238] L. Desalegn and W. Jifara, “Hara-GAN: Hybrid attention and relative average discriminator based generative adversarial network for MR image reconstruction,” IEEE Access , 2024. [239] F. Wu, H. Luo, X. Wang, Q. Yang, Y. Zhuang, L. Lin, Y. Dong, A. Tulupov, Y. Zhang, S. Cai, Z. Chen, C. Cai, J. Bao, and J. Cheng, “Application of anti-motion ultra-fast quantitative MRI in neurological disorder imaging: Insights from huntington’s disease.” Journal of magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI , 2025. [240] C. J. Sakitis and D. B. Rowe, “Bayesian merged utilization of GRAPPA and SENSE (bmugs) for in-plane accelerated reconstruction increases fMRI detection power.” Magnetic resonance imaging , 2025. [241] J. Brun´ atov´ a, M. L¨ ocke, S. Uribe, and C. Bertoglio, “Denoising of dual-venc pc-MRI with large high/low venc ratios.” Mag-netic resonance in medicine , 2025. [242] H. Lan, B. A. Varghese, N. Sheikh-Bahaei, F. Sepehrband, A. W. Toga, J. Choupan, and A. D. N. Initiative, “Diffusion based multi-domain neuroimaging harmonization method with preservation of anatomical details.” NeuroImage , 2025. [243] E. M. C. Huijben, S. Amirrajab, and J. P. W. Pluim, “Enhanc-ing reconstruction-based out-of-distribution detection in brain MRI with model and metric ensembles.” Computer methods and programs in biomedicine , 2025. [244] F. Behrendt, D. Bhattacharya, R. Mieling, L. Maack, J. Kr¨ uger, R. Opfer, and A. Schlaefer, “Guided reconstruction with con-ditioned diffusion models for unsupervised anomaly detection in brain mris.” Computers in biology and medicine , 2025. [245] S. Park, A. Beckett, S. H¨ akkinen, E. Walker, S. J. Ma, S. Kim, H. Kim, and D. A. Feinberg, “Higher spatial resolution and sensitivity in whole brain functional MRI at 7t using 3D epi accelerated with variable density caipi sampling and temporal random walk.” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025. [246] Y. Meng, J. W. Allen, V. K. Sharghi, and D. Qiu, “Motion and temporal b0-shift corrections for qsm and r 2 * mapping using dual-echo spiral navigators and conjugate-phase recon-struction.” Magnetic resonance in medicine , 2025. [247] M. Li, C. Chen, Z. Xiong, Y. Liu, P. Rong, S. Shan, F. Liu, H. Sun, and Y. Gao, “Quantitative susceptibility mapping via deep neural networks with iterative reverse concatenations and recurrent modules.” Medical physics , 2025. [248] U. D. Nagaraj, J. S. Greer, P. Debnath, J. A. Tkach, and B. M. Kline-Fath, “Slice-to-volume reconstruction of fetal brain MR imaging in clinical practice.” AJNR. American journal of neuroradiology , 2025. [249] H. S. Marie, M. M. Draz, W. Said, and M. Elbaz, “Bald uakari algorithm: a novel nature-inspired metaheuristic for missing pixel imputation in medical images,” Cluster Computing , 2026. [250] S. Starck, V. Sideri-Lampretsa, B. Kainz, M. J. Menten, T. T. Mueller, and D. Rueckert, “Diff-def: Diffusion-generated deformation fields for conditional atlases.” IEEE transactions on medical imaging , 2026. [251] S. Saeed, D. Nickel, E. Weiland, L. J. Frohwein, J. H. Niehoff, G. Reiman, J. Schreck, N. Haag, J. Boriesosdick, D. Schoenbeck, M. Katz, I. Shahzadi, M. M. Woeltjen, J. R. Kroeger, J. Borggrefe, and C. Moenninghoff, “Improved image quality and reduced acquisition time in brain MRI using deep learning-based reconstruction: A quantitative and subjective assessment compared to standard mprage in 0.55 t MRI.” 

Magnetic resonance imaging , 2026. [252] Z. Liang, X. Guo, W. Xu, Y. Ibrahim, N. Voets, P. M. Pretorius, A. D. N. Initiative, J. A. Noble, and K. Kamnitsas, “Iter-mask3d: Unsupervised anomaly detection and segmentation with test-time iterative mask refinement in 3D brain MRI.” 

Medical image analysis , 2026. [253] M. U. Mirza, O. Dalmaz, H. A. Bedel, G. Elmas, Y. Korkmaz, A. Gungor, S. U. H. Dar, K. K. Oguz, and T. C ¸ ukur, “Learning fourier-constrained diffusion bridges for MRI reconstruction,” 

IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 2026. [254] S.-H. Kang, J.-Y. Chung, Y. Lee, and A. D. N. Initiative, “Simulation data-based dual domain network (sim-ddnet) for motion artifact reduction in MR images,” MAGNETOCHEM-ISTRY , 2026. [255] A. W. Tessema, S. Jin, H. Cho, S. Han, and H. Cho, “Technical feasibility of an efficient deep learning-based super-resolution method for 3D MR angiography,” IEEE Access , 2026. [256] J. Miao, F. Huang, and D. L. Wilson, “Comprehensive quan-titative image quality evaluation of compressed sensing MRI reconstructions using a weighted perceptual difference model (case-PDM): selective evaluation, disturbance calibration, and aggregative evaluation of noise, blur, aliasing, and oil-painting artifacts,” in SPIE Proceedings , vol. 7627, 2010, p. 762709. [257] M. Kayvanrad, A. Lin, R. Joshi, J. Chiu, and T. Peters, “Diagnostic quality assessment of compressed sensing acceler-ated magnetic resonance neuroimaging,” Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol. 44, pp. 433–444, 2016. [258] K. H. Kim and S.-H. Park, “Artificial neural network for suppression of banding artifacts in balanced steady-state free precession MRI,” Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol. 37, pp. 139–146, 2017. [259] L. S. Chow and H. Rajagopal, “Modified-BRISQUE as no reference image quality assessment for structural MR images,” 

Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol. 43, pp. 74–87, 2017. [260] E. Gong, J. M. Pauly, M. Wintermark, and G. Zaharchuk, “Deep learning enables reduced gadolinium dose for con-trast?enhanced brain MRI,” Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol. 48, pp. 330–340, 2018. [261] B. M. A. Delattre, S. Boudabbous, C. Hansen, A. Neroladaki, A.-L. Hachulla, and M. I. Vargas, “Compressed sensing MRI of different organs: ready for clinical daily practice?” Euro-pean Radiology , vol. 30, pp. 308–319, 2019. [262] Q. Zhang, G. Ruan, W. Yang, Y. Liu, K. Zhao, Q. Feng, W. Chen, E. X. Wu, and Y. Feng, “MRI gibbs?ringing artifact reduction by means of machine learning using convolutional neural networks,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 82, pp. 2133–2145, 2019. [263] K. J. Chung, R. Souza, and R. Frayne, “Restoration of lossy JPEG-compressed brain MR images using cross-domain neural networks,” IEEE Signal Processing Letters , vol. 27, pp. 141– 145, 2020. [264] J. Zhang, J. Wu, S. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Cai, C. Cai, and Z. Chen, “Robust single-shot T2 mapping via multiple overlapping-echo acquisition and deep neural network,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 38, pp. 1801–1811, 2019. [265] J. Liu, M. Kocak, M. Supanich, and J. Deng, “Motion artifacts reduction in brain MRI by means of a deep residual net-work with densely connected multi-resolution blocks (DRN-DCMB),” Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol. 71, pp. 69–79, 2020. [266] G. Wang, E. Gong, S. Banerjee, D. Martin, E. Tong, J. Choi, H. Chen, M. Wintermark, J. M. Pauly, and G. Zaharchuk, 32 

“Synthesize high-quality multi-contrast magnetic resonance imaging from multi-echo acquisition using multi-task deep generative model,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging ,vol. 39, pp. 3089–3099, 2020. [267] Z. Meng, R. Guo, Y. Li, Y. Guan, T. Wang, Y. Zhao, B. Sutton, Y. Li, and Z. Liang, “Accelerating t2mapping of the brain by integrating deep learning priors with low?rank and sparse modeling,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 85, pp. 1455–1467, 2020. [268] D. Karimi, L. Vasung, F. Machado-Rivas, C. Jaimes, S. Khan, and A. Gholipour, “Accurate parameter estimation in fetal diffusion-weighted MRI,” in MICCAI 2021, LNCS 12907 ,2021. [269] A. Garma-Oehmichen, K. P. Acuna-Luna, and A. Santos-Diaz, “Evaluation of echo planar imaging (EPI) distortion correction using synb0-disco and reversed phase encoding acquisition,” in 2021 43rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC) , 2021, pp. 4023–4026. [270] V. Kumar, M. K. Sharma, R. Jehadeesan, B. Venkatraman, G. Suman, A. Patra, A. H. Goenka, and D. Sheet, “Learn-ing to generate missing pulse sequence in MRI using deep convolution neural network trained with visual turing test,” in 2021 43rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC) , 2021, pp. 3419–3422. [271] S.-H. Kim, Y. H. Choi, J. S. Lee, S. B. Lee, Y. J. Cho, S. H. Lee, S.-M. Shin, and J.-E. Cheon, “Deep learning reconstruction in pediatric brain MRI: comparison of image quality with conventional T2-weighted MRI,” Neuroradiology ,vol. 65, pp. 207–214, 2022. [272] K. L. Chan, T. Ziegs, and A. Henning, “Improved sig-nal?to?noise performance of multinet GRAPPA 1h FID MRSI reconstruction with semi?synthetic calibration data,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 88, pp. 1500–1515, 2022. [273] W. Song, C. Zeng, X. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Lin, W. Wei, and X. Qu, “Jointly estimating bias field and recon-structing uniform MRI image by deep learning,” Journal of Magnetic Resonance , vol. 343, p. 107301, 2022. [274] A. Wism¨ uller and M. A. Vosoughi, “Self-supervised learning in medical imaging: anomaly detection in MRI using autoen-coders,” in Real-Time Image Processing and Deep Learning 2022 , 2022, p. 9. [275] K. Matsuo, T. Nakaura, K. Morita, H. Uetani, Y. Nagayama, M. Kidoh, M. Hokamura, Y. Yamashita, K. Shinoda, M. Ueda, A. Mukasa, and T. Hirai, “Feasibility study of super-resolution deep learning-based reconstruction using k-space data in brain diffusion-weighted images,” Neuroradiology , vol. 65, pp. 1619–1629, 2023. [276] U. Yarach, I. Chatnuntawech, K. Setsompop, A. Suwan-nasak, S. Angkurawaranon, C. Madla, C. Hanprasertpong, and P. Sangpin, “Improved reconstruction for highly accelerated propeller diffusion 1.5?t clinical MRI,” Magnetic Resonance Materials in Physics, Biology and Medicine , vol. 37, pp. 283– 294, 2024. [277] S. Shan, Y. Gao, D. Waddington, H. Chen, B. Whelan, P. Liu, Y. Wang, C. Liu, H. Gan, M. Gao, and F. Liu, “Image reconstruction with b? inhomogeneity using a deep unrolled network on an open-bore MRI-linac,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement , vol. 73, pp. 1–9, 2024. [278] G. Chen, H. Xie, X. Rao, X. Liu, M. Otikovs, L. Frydman, P. Sun, Z. Zhang, F. Pan, L. Yang, X. Zhou, M. Liu, Q. Bao, and C. Liu, “MRI motion correction through disentangled CycleGAN based on multi-mask k-space subsampling,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 44, pp. 1907–1921, 2025. [279] A. R. Ismail, M. Z. R. Azhary, N. A. Z. N. Azwan, A. Is-mail, and N. A. Alsaiari, “Performance evaluation of medical image denoising using convolutional autoencoders,” in 2024 3rd International Conference on Creative Communication and Innovative Technology (ICCIT) , 2024, pp. 1–6. [280] J. Wu, L. Chen, Z. Li, X. Li, T. Sun, L. Wang, R. Wang, H. Wei, and Y. Zhang, “3d isotropic high-resolution fetal brain MRI reconstruction from motion corrupted thick data based on physical-informed unsupervised learning,” IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , vol. 29, pp. 8256–8267, 2025. [281] J. W. Choi, Y. J. Cho, S. B. Lee, S. Lee, J.-Y. Hwang, Y. H. Choi, J.-E. Cheon, and J. Lee, “Accelerated brain magnetic resonance imaging with deep learning reconstruction: a com-parative study on image quality in pediatric neuroimaging,” 

Pediatric Radiology , vol. 55, pp. 1903–1914, 2025. [282] D. Joshi, A. Gautam, and B. Borotikar, “Arterial spin labeling-based CBF map generation using a vector quantized varia-tional autoencoder,” in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Computing and Communication Technologies (CONECCT) , 2025, pp. 1–5. [283] Z. Liu, V. Patel, X. Zhou, S. Tao, T. Yu, J. Ma, D. Nickel, P. Liebig, E. M. Westerhold, H. Mojahed, V. Gupta, and E. H. Middlebrooks, “Deep learning reconstruction for 7t MP2RAGE and SPACE MRI: Improving image quality at high acceleration factors,” American Journal of Neuroradiology ,vol. 46, pp. 2446–2454, 2025. [284] M. Mohsen, R. Tamer, H. Hossam, O. Ahmed, and S. Sherif, “Deep super-resolution and age prediction for brain MRI using SRCNN: A lightweight framework for high-fidelity reconstruc-tion and regression,” in 2025 Twelfth International Conference on Intelligent Computing and Information Systems (ICICIS) ,2025, pp. 38–45. [285] J. Xu, T. Zu, Y.-C. Hsu, X. Wang, K. W. Y. Chan, and Y. Zhang, “DEISM: Deep reconstruction framework with self-calibration mechanisms for accelerated chemical exchange saturation transfer imaging,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering , vol. 72, pp. 2413–2424, 2025. [286] X. Wang, M. Cabezas, Z. Tang, A. D’Souza, D. Liu, C. Wang, and W. Cai, “Estimating uncertainty on deep learning-driven fibre orientation distribution enhancement,” in ICONIP 2024, CCIS 2285 , 2025. [287] U. D. Nagaraj, J. Meineke, A. Sriwastwa, J. A. Tkach, J. L. Leach, and M. Doneva, “Evaluation of synthetic images derived from a neural network in pediatric brain magnetic resonance imaging,” Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol. 121, p. 110427, 2025. [288] S. Takada, T. Nakaura, N. Yoshida, H. Uetani, K. Shiraishi, N. Kobayashi, K. Matsuo, K. Morita, Y. Nagayama, M. Kidoh, Y. Yamashita, R. Takayanagi, and T. Hirai, “Impact of super-resolution deep learning-based reconstruction for hippocampal MRI: A volunteer and phantom study,” European Journal of Radiology , vol. 191, p. 112289, 2025. [289] Y. Huang, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Cao, Z. Tu, M. Lin, L. Li, X. Jiang, D. Guo, and X. Qu, “Improve robustness to mis-matched sampling rate: An alternating deep low-rank approach for exponential function reconstruction and its biomedical magnetic resonance applications,” Journal of Magnetic Res-onance , vol. 376, p. 107898, 2025. [290] S. Harada, Y. Takatsu, K. Murayama, Y. Sano, and M. Ikedo, “Verification of resolution and imaging time for high-resolution deep learning reconstruction techniques,” Magnetic Resonance Imaging , vol. 123, p. 110463, 2025. [291] C. Milovic, C. Tejos, J. Silva, K. Shmueli, and P. Irarrazaval, “XSIM : A structural similarity index measure optimized for MRI QSM,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine , vol. 93, pp. 411–421, 2024. [292] L. Xia, X. Qi, J. Liu, Y. Yuan, Y. Wang, N. Xu, and J. Zhang, “Accurate multi-b-value DWI generation using two-stage deep learning: multicenter study,” European Journal of Radiology ,vol. 194, p. 112497, 2026. [293] M. Solak, M. T¨ oren, B. Asan, E. Kaba, M. Beyazal, and 33 

F. B. C ¸ eliker, “Braingan framework for generating synthetic contrast-enhanced multisequence MRI in brain metastases,” 

Journal of Imaging Informatics in Medicine , 2026. [294] A. Tabari, M. Vejdani-Jahromi, M. Lang, D. Nickel, W.-C. Lo, B. Clifford, J. Conklin, and S. Y. Huang, “Clinical validation of deep learning–accelerated versus wave-CAIPI postcontrast 3d T1-MPRAGE for evaluation of intracranial enhancing lesions,” 

American Journal of Neuroradiology , vol. 47, pp. 394–400, 2026. [295] K. Jayadeepthi, K. Yakshitha, K. P. K. Reddy, K. Gowtham, and K. Mahesh, “Deep learning based denoising framework for high-fidelity brain MRI reconstruction,” in 2026 4th Inter-national Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI) , 2026, pp. 696–702. [296] S. Verclytte, G. Beaugrard, D. Nickel, V. Mu˜ noz-Ram´ ırez, L. Norberciak, M. Boissel, V. Chaton, and A. Kwiatkowski, “Deep learning–accelerated 3d FLAIR enables reliable MS le-sion detection,” American Journal of Neuroradiology , vol. 47, pp. 1560–1568, 2026. [297] G. Bathla, P. Rai, V. E. Y. Chan, M. D. Nickel, P. Kollasch, K. Dueker, A. J. Fagan, J. C. Benson, J. Huston, and S. A. Messina, “Deep-learning accelerated vessel wall imaging using T1-SPACE at ultra-high-field strength MRI,” American Jour-nal of Neuroradiology , vol. 47, pp. 1424–1431, 2025. [298] Y. Cao, J. Cao, and B. Li, “Loddpm: High-fidelity pseudo-healthy brain MRI synthesis via longitudinal differential guid-ance,” Biomedical Signal Processing and Control , vol. 123, p. 110600, 2026. [299] S. Fujita, D. Polak, D. Nickel, D. N. Splitthoff, Y. Huang, N. Gil, S. Buathong, C.-H. Chiang, W.-C. Lo, B. Clifford, S. F. Cauley, J. Conklin, and S. Y. Huang, “Motion-informed 3d deep learning reconstruction in patients with cognitive impairment,” American Journal of Neuroradiology , vol. 47, pp. 446–453, 2025.