Title: 2607.09278v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.09278v1

Published Time: Mon, 13 Jul 2026 00:41:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 57

Markdown Content:
> Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 1

Structural Brain Predictors of Visual Attention 

Gradient Modulated by Trait Anxiety 

Suhail Rafiq Mir 1,4# , Dolcy Dhar 1, Ishita Singh 1, Prakrati Gupta 2, Varsha Singh 3# ,

and Mrinmoy Chakrabarty 1#  

> 1

Dept. of Social Sciences and Humanities, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi, New 

Delhi 110020, INDIA.  

> 2

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology Delhi, New 

Delhi 110020, INDIA.  

> 3

Dept. of Humanities and Social Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi 110016, 

INDIA.  

> 4

Dept. of Psychiatry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi 110029, INDIA.  

> #

Equal contribution (Co -first author) 

Correspondence (*): 

Mrinmoy Chakrabarty, Ph.D. 

Assistant Professor (Cognitive Science), Dept. of Social Sciences and Humanities, Indraprastha Institute of 

Information Technology Delhi (IIITD), New Delhi 110020, INDIA. TEL: +91 -011 -26907 -363; E -mail: 

mrinmoy@iiitd.ac.in 

Words in Main Text (excluding abstract, references and figure legends) = 9, 576 

Words in Abstract = 251 

Figures = 4; Tables = 2 

Acknowledgments 

The authors thank the Centre for Advanced Rese arch in Imaging, Neuroscience and Genomics (CARING) of 

Mahajan Imaging, SDA, New Delhi, Delhi 110016, for providing the MRI imaging facility and Ms. Madhuri 

Barnwal, Mr. Baby, and Mr. Sibin for scheduling and technical assistance during scanning. The autho rs are 

grateful to Dr. Sumitash Jana (IIT Delhi) and Dr. Jainendra Shukla (IIIT Delhi) for comments on parts of the Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 2

manuscript, and also thank Mr. Anmol Shrivastav (Bhilai Institute of Technology; Summer Intern 2025 at IIIT 

Delhi) for assistance in the SBM analysis. 

Abstract 

Dynamic allocation of attention across the visual field, quantified as a visual -spatial attention gradient , is 

essential for maintaining perceptual breadth in visual cognition. Disruptions to this attentional flexibility may 

contribute to alterations in spatial attentional bias and could be influenced by affective traits, notably trait 

anxiety. In this study, we examined whether individual variability in structural brain features predicts 

differences in spatial attention deployment with regards to trait anxiety. Sixty participants deemed statistically 

adequate after a priori sample size calculation completed a vi sual -spatial attention gradient task incorporating 

brief, partial facial emotion cues. While no significant behavioural modulation of attention gradients by 

discrete emotional cues was observed, structural neuroimaging analyses revealed that increased grey matter 

volume in bilateral cerebellar lobule VI and greater cortical thickness in the left precentral gyrus and 

paracentral lobule were independently associated with reduced interaction between average attention gradient 

(across emotions ; regardless of va lence ) and trait anxiety. Furthermore, machine learning models reliably 

predicted individual attention –anxiety profiles using these neuroanatomical features. These findings suggest 

that individuals with lower trait anxiety and greater structural integrity in cerebellar and sensorimotor regions 

exhibit more flexible attentional deployment. These results highlight the less known role of cerebellar and 

sensorimotor regions, traditionally associated with motor control, in modulating visual spatial attention, wi th 

regards to individual differences in trait anxiety. This work underscores a less reported neural mechanism in 

cognitive -affective regulation, revealing brain regions that support flexible attentional control in the face of 

anxiety, offering predictive v alue of structural brain markers for cognitive -affective interactions. 

Keywords: Visual Spatial Attention, Trait Anxiety, Cerebellar Lobule VI, Precentral Gyrus, Paracentral 

Lobule, Cortical Thickness, Grey Matter Volume Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 3

1. Introduction 

Visuospatial attention enables efficient processing of visual stimuli, supporting perception and action in 

dynamic environments. Effective daily navigation requires flexible attention allocation across multiple spatial 

locations, such as searching for objects, crossing streets, or driving (Carrasco, 2011) . Failure to distribute 

attention adaptively can impair visual field sampling and lead to attentional narrowing , hindering visually 

guided behaviour. Here, we conceptualize attentional narrowing as a c ontinuous sharpening of the visuospatial 

attention gradient, reflecting disproportionate allocation of attentional resources to near locations at the 

expense of peripheral space (Robertson et al., 2013). Accordingly, steeper gradients are interpreted as gr eater 

severity of attentional narrowing. 

This is particularly relevant in affective traits and disorders, such as anxiety, which distort visual 

processing. Anxiety worsens contrast sensitivity to fearful expressions (Ferneyhough et al. , 2013) , heightens 

ratings of facial emotions (Li et al. , 2008) , amplifies perceived contrast sensitivity (Barbot & Carrasco, 2018) ,

and alters visual temporal resolution (Chakrabarty et al. , 2021) . Thes e visual processing effects extend to 

attentional biases. Anxiety leads to a tendency to focus on task -relevant or negative stimuli (Osinsky et al. ,

2012) , especially emotional facial expressions (Bradley et al. , 2000) . Anxious individuals also show delayed 

disengagement from threatening cues (Fox et al. , 2001; Georgiou et al. , 2005) . Similar biases are seen in 

patients with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), who focus on threatening facial emotion s (Bradley et al. ,

1999; Mogg et al. , 2000) . Evidence shows that individuals with high anxiety preferentially attend to threat -

related stimuli (Mathews & MacLeod, 1994) , with faster responses to t hreatening cues (Bradley et al. ,

1999) and slower reactions to threat -related words in the emotional Stroop task (Mogg et al. , 1989) . Cue d

attention studies reveal weaker spatial attention in anxious individuals at threat -related locations (Fox, 2002) .

Recent studies link trait anxiety to spatial attentional biases, particularly emotional cues (Dodd et al. , 2017; 

Kaur et al. , 2023) .

While brain correlates of emotion -driven attentional biases have been explored using functional 

magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) and electroencephalography ( EEG ) (Vuilleumier & Driver, 2007; Fani et 

al. , 2012; Dominguez -Borras & Vuilleumier, 2013) , the role of brain structure in the visual attention gradient, 

particularly concerning trait anxiety, remains unclear. Unlike functional neuroimaging, which capture s state -Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 4

dependent neural activations during task performance, the present study focuses on GMV and cortical 

thickness as trait -like neuroanatomical markers that index stable inter -individual differences. Structural 

measures are well suited to explain varia bility in attentional capacity and flexibility, as they reflect enduring 

properties of local neural architecture rather than transient task -evoked responses. We therefore adopted a 

morphometric approach to examine whether stable anatomical differences pred ict variability in the visual –

spatial attention gradient and its modulation by trait anxiety. This study addresses this gap by examining how 

brain structural features predict the visual spatial attention gradient quantified as the difference in attentional 

efficiency between near and far locations relative to an emotional cue (Kaur et al. , 2023) . A positive gradient 

indicates greater attention to the near location, while a negative gradient favours the far location. Here, spatial 

attention is operationalised as a graded distribution of attentiona l efficiency across the visual field rather than 

as a binary cue -validity effect. Specifically, we quantify how attentional efficiency varies as a function of 

spatial distance from a cue, yielding a continuous spatial attention gradient. The term attention gradient 

denotes a quantitative measure of how attentional efficiency varies as a function of spatial distance from a 

reference point , rather than a qualitative description of attentional focus. It reflects the relative prioritization 

of near versus far l ocations within the visual field. This gradient -based approach differs from classical Posner 

or dot -probe paradigms, which primarily index whether attention is allocated to a location, and instead 

captures how flexibly attention spreads across space (Robertson et al. , 2013; Kaur et al. , 2023) .Critically, we 

examine whether trait anxiety modulates the relationship bet ween regional brain structure and the steepness 

of visuospatial attention gradients. This interaction is grounded in converging evidence that stable affective 

dispositions influence how enduring structural brain characteristics are translated into function al biases in 

spatial attention, particularly along central -peripheral dimensions of visual processing. In a behavioural 

experiment combined with voxel - and surface -based morphometric analyses using structural MRI, we 

investigated: a) the effect of partial emotion cues on the attention gradient; b) the relationship between grey 

matter volume (GMV), cortical thickness, and the overall attention gradient (averaging across emotions) ; and 

c) the role of trait anxiety in these relationships. Our results showed GM V in Cerebellum lobule VI and cortical 

thickness in the Precentral Gyrus and Paracentral Lobule as independent predictors of the attention gradient, Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 5

in conjunction with trait anxiety. However, briefly presented partial emotion cues did not significantly 

mo dulate the attention gradient. 

2. Material and Methods 

2.1 Participants 

We recruited 60 young adults (23 females ) after written informed consent. All were typically developing, with 

no reported neurological or psychiatric diagnoses and not on medication. They were naive to the study’s aims 

and participated for remuneration . All were university students (post -secondary education) proficient in 

Englis h and could complete self -reported questionnaires. The study was approved by the Institutional Review 

Board of Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology, Delhi, India vide letter reference ID: IRB -

IIITD/FR/11/2022/03 . Participant demographics are in Table 1 . On Day 1, participants completed a 

questionnaire, a ~5 -minute visual contrast thresholding task, and a ~70 -minute behavioural experiment 

(Fig .1). On Day 2, they und erwent a ~30 -minute MRI session. The average interval between Day 1 and Day 

2 acro ss participants was 13.28 days (± 12.29). 

2.2 Sample Size calculation 

We determined the requisite sample size based on effect sizes reported in prior studies involving human 

participants that aligned with the objectives of our behavioural and MRI experiments. A behavioural study 

reported a significant association (Spearman's ρ = –0.55) between trait anxiety and the modulation of 

visuospatial attention by negative affective pre -cues (Kaur et al. , 2022) . These findings were consistent with 

an earlier study (Veerapa et al. , 2020) , which observed a positive relatio nship between trait anxiety and overt 

attentional bias toward negative stimuli (Pearson's r = 0.51; R² = 0.26). Given the limited literature directly 

linking brain structure to visual attention, we considered findings from a study (Bergmann et al. , 2016) close 

to our design, who reported significa nt correlations between visual working memory (VWM) performance 

and structural measures in primary visual cortex (V1), including GMV and cortical thickness (GMV Pearson’s 

r = 0.512; cortical thickness Pearson’s r = 0.424). To ensure a conservative estimate for sample size, we used 

the smallest reported effect size ( r = 0.424) from all the above studies considered in an a priori power analysis Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 6

using the ‘Exact’ method implemented in G*Power 3.1.9.7 (Faul et al. , 2009) . Using a two -tailed alpha level 

of 0.05 and statistical power of 0.80, the calculation yielded a minimum required sample size of 41 participants 

to detec t a significant correlation. Our final sample included 60 participants, exceeding this requirement and 

falling within the range of comparable peer -reviewed studies (Fox, 1996; Bishop, 2009; Chakrabarty et al. ,

2021; Dhar et al. , 2024) .

2.3 Subjective ratings (Questionnaire) 

Participants completed the State –Trait Anxiety Inventory – STAI (Spielberger, 1983) to assess self -reported 

anxiety levels before the start of the behavi oural experiment on Day 1. Trait anxiety indicates a relatively 

stable tendency to perceive a wide range of situations as threatening, and it serves as an index of an individual's 

general propensity to respond with anxiety to perceived stressors over time (Wiedemann, 2015; Spielberger, 

2022) . The trait su bscale of the STAI consists of 20 items rated on a four -point Likert scale ranging from "Not 

at all" to "Very much so," yielding a total score between 20 and 80. Higher scores denote greater levels of trait 

anxiety. The measure demonstrates good temporal s tability, with test –retest reliability coefficients reported 

between 0.69 and 0.89 over two months (Spielberger, C.D., Gorsuch, R.L., Lushene, R., Va gg, P.R., Jacobs, 

1983) . Although both state and trait anxiety were assessed to characterize the sample, our analyses focused on 

trait anxiety because the study aimed to associate stable individual differences in visuospatial attention 

gradients to structural brain measures. State anxiety, which primarily reflects transient emotional arousal, was 

not entered into inferential models as it is less suited to explaining trait -like structure –behaviour associations. 

2.4 Contrast Threshold of Visual Target 

Each participant's target contrast threshold (just -noticeable -difference) was adaptively estimated at the farthest 

/ largest eccentricity (6 o) using responses collected over a block of 50 trials implemented in PsychoPy 

v2022.1.3. This procedure was desig ned to determine the contrast level corresponding to 80% accuracy at the 

largest target eccentricity from the centre of the screen, which was then used throughout the experiment. 

Threshold estimation followed a modified one -up, three -down staircase procedu re: contrast increased after 

each incorrect response and decreased following three consecutive correct responses. The step size was Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 7

initially set at 8 dB and was reduced after every two staircase reversals, reaching a minimum of 1 dB. The 

individual thresh old was defined as the mean contrast level across the final six reversals. This procedure 

ensured participants were equated at baseline regarding task difficulty, thereby controlling for inter -individual 

differences in visual sensitivity. Thresholding at t he most demanding spatial location ( farthest / largest 

eccentricity (6 o) ensured perceptual visibility without ceiling effects while preserving sensitivity to attentional 

modulation. This allowed for the isolation of the effects of emotional facial cues on visuospatial attention, 

consistent with the study's hypothesis. The average contrast threshold across participants was 0.17 (SD ± 

0.13). 

2.5 Behavioural Experiment 

Participants were seated 57 cm from a 27 -inch ACER monitor (1920 × 1080 pixels; 144 Hz; su btending ~60 

× 34° of visual angle), with head and chin rests used to stabilize gaze. Visual stimuli were presented to 

participants in a well -lighted room using custom scripts written in PsychoPy (v2021.2.1). Each trial 

commenced with a central white fixat ion cross (1 × 1°), displayed randomly between 300 and 500 ms. The 

offset of the fixation cross was immediately followed by the simultaneous presentation of a spatial attention 

cue (a filled black circle, 0.5° in diameter, positioned 5° left or right of ce ntre on the horizontal meridian) and 

a central image prime (7 × 7/2° visual angle) for 50 ms. The spatial cue was intended to direct covert attention 

toward one visual hemifield in preparation for the upcoming target. At the same time, the image prime serv ed 

as a task -irrelevant emotional or neutral stimulus. Following a 150 ms inter -stimulus interval (ISI), the target 

stimulus —a Gabor patch (1° diameter; spatial frequency = 3 cycles/degree; contrast = at individual 

participant's visual contrast threshold; luminance = 28.9 cd/m²) was presented for ~40 ms at one of three 

vertical eccentricities (±1.5°, 3°, or 6° from the cue location), randomly on either the left or right side of the 

display. A distractor stimulus (a black open circle; 1° diameter; contrast = 100%) was simultaneously 

presented at the location diametrically opposite the target. After stimulus presentation, an instruction screen 

prompted participants to respond using a standard PC keypad within 2 s. Each trial ended upon response within 

2s, afte r which visual feedback was provided, followed by a 500 ms blank interval before the subsequent trial. 

The inter -stimulus interval (ISI) was fixed across all trials and conditions and implemented as 21 screen refresh Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 8

frames on a 144 Hz display (21 × 6.9 ms = 144.9 ms), reported as ~150 ms for convenience in Figure 1A. To 

prevent saccades and isolate covert attentional processes, the interval between the onset of the image prime + 

spatial cue and the target was fixed at 200 ms, well under the latency of typical eye movements (~300 ms). 

Participants were instructed to lo ok at a central fixation throughout each trial, attend covertly to the peripheral 

cue, ignore the central image prime, and report the orientation (left - or right -tilt) of the Gabor target as quickly 

and accurately as possible. Participants reported the ori entation of a briefly presented Gabor patch rather than 

performing a simple detection or speeded response task. We chose this since simple reaction time measures 

may conflate attentional orienting with motor preparation and decisional urgency, all of which are 

systematically influenced by anxiety and arousal (Bishop, 2009) . Orientation discrimination on the other hand, 

requires visual encoding under attentional constraints and therefore, provides a more direct behavioural index 

of attentional modulation. Accordingly, orientation sensitivity was used here as a validated readout of spatial 

attentional allocation. Emotional evaluation of the primes was not required, as the task focused on perceptual 

discrimination under conditions o f explicit awareness of the primes but without directing attention to them. 

Each participant completed six experimental sessions (72 trials per session; total = 432 trials) in a 

single lab visit. Within each session, 24 trials were primed with Neutral, Fe arful faces, and Scrambled (control) 

images. For both emotional face conditions, primes consisted of an equal number of male and female faces 

(12 each). Each image type was presented equally across the three vertical eccentricities (1.5°, 3°, and 6°). 

Tria l order was randomized within each session to eliminate the predictability of prime type and target 

location. The critical manipulation was the unexpected presentation of task -irrelevant image primes (Neutral, 

Fear, or Scrambled human faces) preceding the task -relevant target. If emotional content modulated spatial 

attention, attentional efficiency —quantified as performance across target eccentricities —would differ 

between emotion -bearing and control conditions. Before the main experiment, participants comp leted 10 –20 

practice trials, and the task began only after verbal confirmation that they fully understood the instructions. 

The entire session lasted approximately 70 minutes per participant. 

Seventy -two unique grayscale face images (36 male, 36 female) were used, comprising equal numbers 

of Neutral and Fearful expressions. Images were sourced from validated, non -commercial databases: the 

Karolinska Directed Emotional Faces (Lundqvist, D., Flykt, A., Ohman, 1998) KDEF emotion ratings Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 9

reported by Goeleven et al. (2008) were: valence = 6.23 (Fear), 4.75 (Neutral); arousal = 3.71 (Fear), 2.67 

(Neutral). All images were converted to grayscale and luminance -normalized (mean pixel intensity = 128; 

range = 0 –255) following procedures described by (Chakrabarty & Wada, 202 0) . Scrambled images, used as 

control primes, were generated by random pixel permutation of grayscale face images to eliminate facial 

structure while preserving overall luminance and contrast. Next, a facial landmark detection model was 

utilised to comp utationally identify salient facial features corresponding to the eyebrows and eyes, 

implemented via the OpenCV library (Gary Bradski, 2000) . Pupil coordinates were estimated by computing 

the intersection of four key landmark points surrounding each, following the facial landmark schema explained 

elsewhere (Kazemi & Sullivan, 2014) . Finally, face images were cropped using OpenCV so that only the eye 

and eyebrow regions were visible, and all images were resized. Each unique face image per emotion was 

shown twice across different sessions per participant. Fearful eye -region images were specifically chosen 

because the eyes and eyebrows alone convey reliable threat -related emotional information and have been 

shown to modulate at tention and perception even in the absence of full facial context (Whalen et al. , 2001; 

Sadr et al. , 2003) . Their use allowed us to test whether a minimal, task -irrelevant threat signal could provide 

the affective perturbation to bias visuospatial attention gradients. The distance between the eye and eyebrow 

was not manipulated but reflected natural variation across facial identities and expressions. The white scleral 

region of the eye was not independently quantified but only the eye -eyebrow region was treated as a subtle 

emotional cue. Figure 1 illustrates the experimental paradi gm. 

2.6 Structural Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Experiment 

The anatomical images of the participants' brains were collected at the Magnetic Resonance Imaging facility 

of Mahajan Imaging & Labs, New Delhi, INDIA. The T1 -weighted anatomical images were obtained from all 

the participants with the following acquisition parameters: Field Strength = 3 Tesla, 3D Ax T1 MP Rage, 

Repetition time/TR = 2.4s, Echo time/TE =2.3ms, Inversion time = 1s, Voxel size = 1.0 ×1.0 ×1.0, Matrix 

size = 256 × 256, Flip angle = 25 o, Slice thickness = 1mm, Number of slices = 176. The present study 

employed voxel -based morphometry (VBM) and surface -based morphometry (SBM) to quantify regional gray 

matter volume and cortical thickness, respectively. These measures captured local gray -matter architecture Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 10 

rather than white -matter connectivity. While diffusion -based techniques are optimal for assessing tract 

integrity, our questions concerned regional structural substrates associated with individual differences in 

attentional deploym ent. Accordingly, GMV and cortical thickness were treated as complementary indices of 

local computational capacity within nodes of established cognitive networks. 

2.7. 1 Behavioural Analysis 

Keypad response data were analysed using custom -written scripts. The analysis procedure for a single 

participant is outlined below. Within each session, responses were sorted by emotion condition (Neutral, Fear, 

Scrambled) and target eccentricity (1.5°, 3°, and 6°) within each emotion. For each condition, the m edian 

reaction time (RT) from correct trials , those in which the participant accurately discriminated the target 

orientation and the proportion of correct responses (accuracy) were used to compute the negative inverse 

efficiency score (nIES) , an index of a ttentional efficiency (Kaur et al. , 2023) . This metric is a modified 

version of the inverse efficiency score originally proposed earlier (Townsend & Ashby, 1978) , wherein higher 

nIES values indicate greater attentional efficiency. The inverse efficiency score combines RT and accuracy 

into a single metric, allowing a robust assessment of speed -accuracy trade -offs commonly use d in attentional 

studies (Townsend & Ashby, 1978; Robertson et al. , 2013) . The nIES was calculated separately for each of 

the three eccentricities and acr oss all three emotion conditions. To account for session -level variability, the 

nIES scores for each of the six sessions were then independently standardised (z -scored) across sessions for 

each emotion condition. Note that the nIES values were calculated a t three spatial locations relative to the 

central emotional cue presented at the screen centre: Near (1.5°), Intermediate (3°), and Far (6°). These were 

included to characterise the spatial distribution of emotion -cued attentional modulation. However, the 

Intermediate eccentricity (3°) was excluded from subsequent statistical analyses. This exclusion was 

intentional and theory -driven. The visuospatial attention gradient was defined as the difference between Near 

and Far locations to maximize spatial separat ion and yield a single, interpretable index of global attentional 

bias across space. The intermediate eccentricity served to ensure dense spatial sampling and to confirm 

monotonic changes in attentional efficiency, but was not included in the gradient comp utation to avoid Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 11 

capturing local effects, consistent with prior gradient -based approaches (Carrasco, 20 11; Robertson et al. ,

2013; Kaur et al. , 2023) .

To quantify the spatial gradient of visuospatial attention (hereafter referred to as the 'gradient') in each 

participant, a central -to -peripheral attentional gradient was computed in each emotion as the difference in 

normalized inverse efficiency scores (n IES) between 1.5° and 6° eccentricity. This directly quantified the 

magnitude of attentional fall -off across the maximal spatial separation in the task design, with 1.5° indexing 

near -central processing and 6° indexing far -peripheral processing. The result ing difference score therefore, 

captured the steepness and direction of spatial attentional bias and the extent of peripheral attenuation. Given 

that emotion conditions did not significantly modulate this directional gradient, subsequent MRI analyses 

focus ed on individual differences in the overall strength of spatial attentional modulation independent of sign 

as follows. 

A participant -level composite index of spatial attentional narrowing was derived by combining the emotion -

specific gradients using the E uclidean norm across conditions. The Euclidean norm (i.e., the square root of 

the summed squared gradients) provides a magnitude -based aggregation of multiple components in 

multidimensional space (L2 norm), preserving overall gradient strength while preven ting directional 

cancellation and ensuring equal weighting across the experimental conditions, e.g., emotional conditions 

(Strang, 2009). Conceptually, this procedure yields the root -mean -square magnitude of spatial attentional 

gradients across emotional c onditions, thereby indexing the average strength of spatial attentional bias 

independent of sign. The resulting scalar composite gradient was entered as a regressor in the voxel - and 

surface -based morphometry analyses. This metric captures the steepness or overall strength of spatial 

attentional modulation irrespective of whether attention was biased toward near or far space, and is therefore, 

more appropriate for relating stable structural brain features to individual variability in attentional flexibility .

This endpoint -based metric captures global spatial prioritization across the visual field rather than local 

variations and is mathematically equivalent to a slope estimate between the two extremes. Larger values 

indicate steeper gradients, corresponding to stronger spatial attentional bias across eccentricities or spatially 

restricted attention, whereas attenuated gradients indicate more uniform attentional deployment. The Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 12 

Composite Gradient therefore, provides a quantitative index of the magnitude (stren gth) of spatial attentional 

bias irrespective of direction, such that larger values reflect greater differentiation in attentional allocation 

across spatial locations, whereas attenuated gradients indicate broader and more flexible attentional 

deployment. The spatial attention gradient was computed as a within -subject difference between Near and Far 

target locations, reducing the influence of global factors such as anxiety -related tonic arousal. This derived 

gradient score was used in subsequent statistica l analyses. The average task accuracy across all six sessions 

was > 80 % per participant. The group -level mean accuracy was 89 ± 0.09% (mean ± SD) .

2.7.2 Voxel -Based Morphometry (VBM) Analysis 

All imaging data were processed and analyzed using Statistic al Parametric Mapping -SPM12, version 7771, 

(Penny et al. , 2007) in conjunction with the Computational Anatomy Toolbox (CAT12, version 12.8.1, r2043) 

(Gaser et al. , 2020) , implemented in MATLAB 2023a (MathWorks Inc.). Structural T1 -weighted scans were 

initially aligned to a common anatomical space such that the anterior commissure of each image coincided 

with that of the default SPM template. Image preprocessing followed the standard CAT12 segmentation 

pipeline, employing the Adaptive Maximum a Posteriori (AMAP) method, which does not rely on pre -defined 

tissue priors. Initial segmentation divided the brain into gray matter (GM), white matter (WM), and 

cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), followed by Partial Volume Estimation (PVE) to account for mixed tissue classes 

(GM -WM and GM -CSF). Before segmentation, all images underwent affine registration to a standard 

template, skull stripping, and normalization to Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space. Bias -corrected, 

segmented GM images were subjected to CAT12's sample homogeneity quali ty check. Individual Image 

Quality Ratings (IQRs) were recorded, and only scans exceeding a threshold of 70% were retained for analysis 

(mean ± SD = 86.07 ± 4.47, range: 73.12 – 93.02). Total intracranial volume (TIV) was estimated for each 

participant (me an ± SD = 1.45 ± 0.15 cm³). Finally, GM tissue probability maps were smoothed with an 8 mm 

full -width at half -maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel. This voxel -based morphometry (VBM) approach 

enables voxel -wise estimation of regional gray matter volume (rGMV) at a spatial resolution of 1× 1× 1mm³, 

allowing for precise statistical analysis of structural brain differences across cortical and subcortical regions. 

Smoothed gray matter images were entered into a second -level multiple regression analysis, with the Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 13 

comp osite attention -gradient magnitude (Euclidean norm across conditions ) and its interaction with trait 

anxiety specified as the covariates of interest, while controlling for age and TIV. This analysis aimed to 

identify associations of gradient and gradient i n the context of trait anxiety with regional gray matter 

morphology. Trait anxiety was not included as a n uisance covariate in the voxel -wise morphometric analyses 

because statistically treating trait anxiety as a nuisance regressor would remove variance s hared with 

attentional performance and exclude the focal relationship of interest, i.e., anxiety -dependent modulation of 

attentional gradients, while imposing an additive model inappropriate for conceptually interdependent 

predictors (Miller & Chapman, 2001; Yzerby t et al. , 2004) . The independent variables in the model were 

orthogonal. To identify significant differences in regional GMV, a voxel -level height threshold of p < 0.001 

(uncorrected) was applied across the whole brain. To control for multiple comparisons and reduce the risk of 

false positives, we subsequently applied family -wise error (FWE) correction at the voxel level, with a 

significance threshold of p < 0.05 (FWE -corrected). When voxel -level FWE correction did not yield 

significant results, correction was applied at the cluster level, using a significance threshold of p < 0.05 (FWE -

corrected). Only clusters or voxels surviving this correction were considered s tatistically significant. 

Anatomical labelling of significant regions was done using the CAT12_AAL3 atlas (Tzourio -Mazoyer et al. ,

2002) . Additionally, voxel -wise GMVs were extracted from the above significant regions and subjected to 

linear regression and predictive modelling analyses. 

2.7.3 Surface -Based Morphometry (SBM) Analysis 

T1 -we ighted structural images were analysed using the CAT12 and SPM12 toolboxes implemented in 

MATLAB2023a to perform surface -based morphometry (SBM). Cortical surface reconstruction followed the 

standard SBM pipeline within the CAT12 framework. This included c ortical thickness estimation and central 

surface reconstruction using the projection -based thickness (PBT) method. Topological correction was applied 

following surface reconstruction, and the resulting surfaces were further refined to produce the final cen tral 

surface mesh. Individual central surfaces were registered to the Freesurfer 'FsAverage' template via spherical 

mapping. Subsequently, surface meshes for all participants were smoothed using a 15 mm full -width at half -

maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel, in line with previous work (Lerch & Evans, 2005) and recommendation Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 14 

(Gaser et al. , 2020) . The independent variables in the model were orthogonal. Subsequently, vertex -wise 

correlations between cortical thickness and the composite attention -gradient magnitude (Euclidean norm 

across conditions ) and its interaction with trait anxiety were computed across the cortical surface. Trait anxiety 

was not included as a nuis ance covariate in the vertex -wise morphometric analyses because of the same reason 

as explained under ‘VBM analysis’ above. The resulting statistical maps were thresholded at a vertex -level 

of p < 0.005 (uncorrected) across the whole cortical surface, a t hreshold previously demonstrated to offer a 

sensitive and appropriate balance between Type I and Type II error rates with 15mm FWHM in cortical 

thickness analysis (Lerch & Evans, 2005) . To control for multiple comparisons and reduce the likelihood of 

false positives, a cluster -level family -wise error (FWE) correction was subsequently applied, with a 

significance threshold of p < 0.05 (FWE -corrected). Onl y clusters or vertices surviving this correction were 

deemed statistically significant. Anatomical labelling of significant regions was performed using the 

CAT12_AAL3 atlas (Tzourio -Mazoyer et al. , 2002) . Consistent with the VBM analysis, vertex -wise cortical 

thickness values were extracted from the aforementioned significant regions and su bsequently entered into 

linear regression and predictive modelling analyses. 

2.7.4 Prediction analysis 

We employed a machine learning approach to identify brain -based predictors of individual variability 

in attention gradient as followed earlier (Qin et al. , 2014) . Data from significant clusters in whole -brain VBM 

and SBM analyses were further analysed using a machine learning approach (5 -fold cross -validation + linear 

regression) to identify neuroanatomical predictors of individual differences in the gradient regarding anxiety 

(i.e., gradient × trait anxiety interaction). Attention gradient served as the dependent variable, and structural 

brain meas ures (total GMV of bilateral cerebellum lobule VI and total cortical thickness of left precentral 

gyrus and paracentral lobule in two independent analyses) were used as the independent variable. In the first 

step, the model's predictive accuracy was assess ed by computing the correlation between predicted and 

observed values [Pearson's r(predicted, observed)]. The dataset was partitioned into five folds, ensuring that Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 15 

the distributions of the dependent and independent variables were balanced across folds. A linear regression 

model was trained on four folds and tested on the remaining fold. This process was iterated five times, with 

each fold used once as the test set. The resulting r(predicted, observed) represented the average model 

performance across folds. A nonparametric permutation test was conducted to evaluate statistical significance. 

An empirical null distribution of r(predicted, observed) was generated by permuting the target variable labels 

in 2,000 surrogate datasets under the null hypothesis of no association between attention gradient and 

cerebellar volume , on the one hand, and cortical thickness of left precentral gyrus and paracentral lobule, on 

the other hand . For each surrogate dataset, r(predicted, observed)_surrogate was computed using the s ame 5 -

fold cross -validation procedure. The p-value was derived by calculating the proportion of permuted 

r(predicted, observed)_surrogate values exceeding the observed / empirical r( predicted, observed). Note that 

only the hypothesized relationships betwee n attention gradient, trait anxiety, and regional morphometry 

(GMV or cortical thickness) were examined. No additional models were tested or omitted. 

[Insert Figure 1] 

3. Results 

3.1 Effects of partial Emotion pre -cues on Attention gradient 

A preliminary analysis revealed a significant effect of eccentricity on attentional efficiency ( F(2,118) = 13.56, 

p = 0.000035, partial η² = 0.19), with attentional efficiency decreasing as target eccentricity increased from 

near (1.5°) to far (6°) locations across emot ion conditions (see Supplementary Information – Analysis 1; Fig. 

2). Having established this eccentricity -dependent attentional gradient, the main investigation was to 

determine whether image primes conveying different emotional signals modulated visuospat ial attention 

gradients. Consequently, a one -way repeated -measures ANOVA was conducted with emotion condition as a 

within -subject factor (Neutral, Fear, Scrambled). Assumptions of normality (Lilliefors test; all ps ≥ 0. 16 ) and 

sphericity (Mauchly’s test: W = 0.99, p = 0. 72 ) were confirmed. This revealed no significant main effect of 

emotion condition on gradients ( F(2, 118) = 0. 19 , p = 0. 82 , partial η² = 0. 0033 ; Supplementary Fig. 1), indicating Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 16 

that brief, partial emotion cues did not systematically bias t he spatial allocation of visual attention. Given the 

absence of emotion -specific modulation of the signed gradient, subsequent brain -behaviour analyses focused 

on the single composite gradient magnitude (Euclidean norm) per participant, reflecting the over all strength 

of spatial attentional modulation independent of directional bias. Although the Euclidean norm is direction -

invariant, examination of the signed Near minus Far gradients used to derive the final Euclidean norm -based 

metric revealed that approx imately 75% of participants exhibited positive gradients (Supplementary Fig.2). 

Thus, near -space prioritization represented the predominant attentional profile in the present sample, even 

though the Euclidean norm itself indexes the magnitude of spatial at tentional bias irrespective of direction. 

To facilitate the interpretation of the subsequent neuroimaging analyses, we additionally examined the direct 

associations between anxiety measures and behavioural attention indices. Trait anxiety was not signific antly 

associated with nIES values at any eccentricity or emotion condition, nor with the composite gradient measure. 

Likewise, trait and state anxiety were not significantly correlated, and state anxiety was not significantly 

associated with the composite gradient measure. Further, whole -brain analyses examining trait anxiety as the 

sole predictor of gray matter volume and cortical thickness revealed no significant FWE -corrected effects, 

indicating an absence of direct morphometric correlates of trait anxie ty in the present sample (all p > .05; see 

Supplementary Information Analysis 2; Table 1 for complete results) . Additional analyses examining the 

reliability of the gradient measure, its convergence with an alternative three -eccentricity slope -based gradient 

metric, and the robustness of the neuroimaging findings are reported in the s upporting Supplementary Analysi s

3.

[Insert Figure 2] 

3.2 Relationship of GMV with Attention Gradient and Trait Anxiety 

To investigate how the gradient, independently and in interaction with trait anxiety, relates to whole -brain 

GMV, we performed multiple regression analyses after co ntrolling for age and total intracranial volume (TIV) Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 17 

as covariates. The interaction term was computed by multiplying each participant’s gradient score by their 

corresponding trait anxiety score. 

We first assessed the association between the whole -brain GMV and gradient . Voxel -wise multiple regression 

identified a significant negative correlation (Pearson’s r(58) = − 0. 40 , 95% confidence interval = [− 0. 59 ,

− 0. 16 ]) in the right cerebellar lobule VI (whole -brain voxel -wise FWE correction at p <0.05 ;-

T(56 ) = 5.16 , cluster -level pFWE = 0. 03 , cluster size kE = 4; Table 2-A, Fig. 3A -B). Specifically, larger GMV 

in this region corresponded to reduced gradient values, indicati ve of greater regional grey matter architecture 

associated with enhanced flexibility in visuospatial attentional deployment. No other region showed 

positive/negative correlations. 

Second, we explored how the interaction between gradient and trait anxiety influences GMV, aiming to clarify 

whether the relationship between gradient and grey matter varies across individuals with differing levels of 

trait anxiety. Using voxel -wise regression incorporating the interaction term (attention gradient × trait 

anxiet y), we identified a significant effect in bilateral cerebellar lobule VI ( cluster -defining threshold of p <

0.001 (uncorrected) and cluster -extent threshold = 80 expected voxels per cluster , considered significant at a 

cluster -level FWE -corrected threshold of p < 0.05; T(56) = 3.24, cluster -level pFWE < 0.022, cluster size kE ≥

871 voxels ; see Table 2-B and Fig. 3C –D). Notably , the previously observed negative correlation between 

GMV and gra dient in this region was further modulated by trait anxiety severity indicating that individuals 

with higher anxiety showed a stronger inverse GMV - gradient relationship (slope = -1.63, Pearson’s r(28) = -

0.43, 95% confidence interval = [− 0.68, − 0.08]) , whereas this effect was attenuated in those with lower 

anxiety (slope = -1.01 , Pearson’s r(28) = -0.28, 95% confidence interval = [− 0.58, 0.09] ). This suggests that 

trait anxiety moderates how bilateral cerebellum lobule VI relates to visuospatial attent ional flexibility. To 

clarify the nature of the interaction, the observed effects do not reflect a simple additive strengthening of gray 

matter volume -attention associations driven by anxiety -related structural differences. Rather, trait anxiety 

selectivel y amplified the coupling between regional GMV and attentional gradients within cerebellar regions. 

Lower anxiety did not reverse this relationship, nor did anxiety independently account for additional structural Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 18 

variance. Instead, anxiety moderated the slo pe of the GMV -attention gradient association, such that structure -

attention coupling emerged preferentially at higher levels of trait anxiety. 

Next, we stratified the data by gender to uncover underlying patterns . The data was split separately by 

the media n trait anxiety scores of females (median = 47 ) and males ( median = 42 ) into High Anxiety subset 

(≥ median, n females = 12, n males = 21 ) and Low Anxiety subset ( < median, n females = 11, n males = 16 ) respectively. 

We observed a notable divergence in the relationship between GMV, gradient, and trait anxiety: this 

modulation effect of trait anxiety on the GMV –gradient association appeared stronger in females ( High 

Anxiety subset: slope = -2.85, Pearson’s r(10) = -0.79, 95% confidence interval = [− 0.89, − 0 .60] ; Low Anxiety 

subset: slope = -2.78, Pearson’s r(9) = -0.66, 95% confidence interval = [− 0.82 , − 0.39 ]) than in males (High 

Anxiety subset: slope = -1.00, Pearson’s r(19) = -0.23, 95% confidence interval = [− 0.55, 0.14] ; Low Anxiety 

subset: slope = -1.73, Pearson’s r(14) = -0.28, 95% confidence interval = [− 0.58, - 0.09 ]; see Supplementary 

Fig. 3). However, when we statistically compared the slopes of these gender -specific trends using analysis of 

covariance ( ANCOVA ) in each anxiety subset , the difference did not reach significance (High Anxiety subset: 

F(1,29) = 2.27, p = 0.14; Low Anxiety subset: F(1,23) = 0.28, p = 0.59 ), likely reflecting the limited sample size 

within each gender subset. Further, there were no differences of either gradient (independent t(58) = 0.53, p =

0.59) or trait anxiety (independent t(58) = -1.23, p = 0.22) between males and females. 

We then implemented a machine -learning approach using linear regression with balanced five -fold 

cross -validation to test whether total GMV in bilateral cerebellar lobule VI could predict individual gradient 

× trait -anxiety interaction scores. The model demonstrated significant predictive validity , r(predicted, 

observed) = -0. 49 , two -tailed p = 0. 009 (Fig. 3E –F), indicating that greater bilateral lobule VI volume reliably 

predicts lower gradient values , reflecting enhanced attentional flexibility , particularly when accounting for 

trait anxiety severity. 

Overall, individuals with a lesser GMV of cerebellar lobule VI manifested greater magnitudes of 

spatial attentional bias, which was more pronounced in females than in males. Cerebellar lobule VI may 

interact with trait anxiety in tuning fine -grained spatial attention, which may pred ict individual differences 

in the magnitude of spatial attentional bias. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 19 

[Insert Figure 3] 

3.3 Relationship of Cortical Thickness with Attention Gradient and Trait Anxiety 

To examine how the gradient —independently and in interaction with trait anxiety —is related to whole -brain 

cortical thickness, we conducted multiple regression analyses, controlling for age. The interaction term was 

calculated by multiplying each participant's gradient score by their corresponding trait anxiety score as earlier .

This approach allowed us to assess the main effects and the moderating role of trait anxiety on cortical 

thickness. 

First, we examined the relationship between whole -brain cortical thickness and the gradient, which 

revealed significant negative correlat ion in the cluster consisting of the regions: left inferior frontal gyrus and 

left precentral gyrus (Pearson’s r(58) = − 0.33 , 95% confidence interval =[ -0.54 , -0.08 ]) which was statistically 

significant (cluster -defining threshold of p < 0.005 (uncorrected) and cluster -extent threshold = 111 vertices 

expected per cluster , considered significant at a cluster -level FWE -corrected threshold of p < 0.05; 

T(57) = 3.89, cluster -level pFWE = 0.024, cluster size kE = 526 vertices ; see Table 2-C; Fig. 4A –B). These 

results indicate that greater cortical thickness in lateral prefrontal and premotor regions is associated with 

lower gradient values, suggesting enhanced flexibility in visuospatial attentional deployment. No additional 

brain regions exhi bited significant positive or negative correlations. 

Subsequently, we examined whether the interaction between gradient and trait anxiety influenced 

cortical thickness —specifically, whether trait anxiety moderated the relationship between gradient and 

cort ical thickness across individuals. Whole -brain regression revealed significant effects in the cluster 

consisting regions from left precentral gyrus and left paracentral lobule (cluster -defining threshold of p <

0.005 (uncorrected) and cluster -extent threshold = 111 expected vertices per cluster , considered significant at 

a cluster -level FWE -corrected threshold of p < 0.05; T(57) = 3.41, cluster -level pFWE = 0.049, cluster size kE =

446 vertices; Table 2-D; Fig 4C –D) Mirroring our GMV results, the negative correlation between cortical 

thickness and gradient in these regions was significantly modulated by trait anxiety. Individuals higher in trait Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 20 

anxiety displayed a stronger inverse relationship (slope = -0.52, P earson’s r(28) = -0. 51 , 95% confidence 

interval = [− 0. 73 , − 0. 17 ]) , i.e., thicker cortex linked to enhanced attentional flexibility , whereas this effect 

was diminished among those lower in trait anxiety (slope = -0.18, Pearson’s r(28) = -0. 21 , 95% confidence 

interval = [− 0. 52 , 0.17 ]) . These findings suggest that trait anxiety significantly moderates the structural basis 

of visuospatial attentional flexibility in motor regions. The pattern of this interaction was similar to the VBM 

analysis. The int eraction indicates that higher trait anxiety increased the sensitivity of cortical thickness -

attention gradient coupling, particularly within sensorimotor regions. This effect reflects a conditional 

amplification of the cortical thickness -attention relatio nship under higher anxiety. Trait anxiety thus, 

functioned as a moderator that gated the expression of cortical thickness influences on attentional gradients. 

When stratified by gender, we observed a faint relationship among cortical thickness, gradient, a nd 

trait anxiety in the data . Specifically, the modulatory impact of trait anxiety on the association between cortical 

thickness and the gradient was comparable between the two genders after running an ANCOVA (F(1,56) = 0.19, 

p = 0.67 ; see Supplementary Fig. 4). Please note that we did not median split the data into High and Low 

Anxiety subsets as there was no apparent effect between the genders after inspecting the scatter plots. 

Finally, we applied a machine -learning approach, using linear regression with five -fold cross -

validation, to evaluate whether total cortical thickness in the left precentral gyrus and left paracentral lobule 

could predict each participant's gradient × trait anxiety interaction score. The model demonstrated significant 

predictiv e accuracy, r(predicted, observed) = -0.4 4, two -tailed p = 0.0 26 (Fig. 4E –F) . This finding indicates 

that greater cortical thickness in these motor -related regions reliably predicts lower gradient values reflecting 

enhanced attentional flexibility —particularly when accounting for variations in trait anxiety severity. 

[Insert Figure 4] Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 21 

4. Discussion 

In the present study, we examined whether brief emotional signals conveyed by partial facial expressions 

modulate the gradient of visual spatial attention. Unlike classical dot -probe or Posner paradigms that yield 

binary cue -validity effects, our task characterises spatial attention as a continuous gradient across eccentricity. 

This approach is particularly suited to examining attentional narrowing and individual differences related to 

trait anxiety, which may not be fully captured by simple reaction time benefits at cued locations. We further 

explored whole -brain grey matter volume (GMV) and cortical thickness correlates independently associated 

with the overall gradient (averaged across the trials primed by three partial emotional cues ) in the context of 

inter -individual differences of trait anxiety. Although no significant attentional bias was observed in response 

to partial facial emotion cues, structural neuroimaging revealed that GMV in bilateral cerebellar lobule VI, as 

well as total cortical thickness in the left (inferior fron tal gyrus, precentral gyrus, and paracentral lobule ), were 

independently and negatively associated with the gradient . Additionally, GMV in bilateral cerebellar lobule 

VI and cortical thickness in the left precentral and paracentral lobules were negatively associated with the 

interaction term between the attention gradient and trait anxiety . These findings suggest that individual 

differences in structural brain substrates may contribute to the modulation of spatial attention, contingent upon 

trait anxiety se verity. Specifically, greater GMV and cortical thickness were associated with attenuated 

gradients — indicative of more flexible spatial attention deployment in individuals with lower trait anxiety. 

Though gender differences in this relationship were appar ent with GMV , they were not statistically significant, 

likely due to the limited gender -wise sample size. Complementary machine -learning analys es reliably 

predicted the gradient –trait anxiety interaction term using these structural metrics, supporting their dissociable 

roles . In this context, the observed associations between structural brain measures and the visuospatial 

attention gradient can be interpreted in terms of individual differences in spatial attentional bias. Individuals 

with lower cerebell ar lobule VI volume or reduced sensorimotor cortical thickness exhibited steeper gradients, 

reflecting greater attentional narrowing (greater attentional differentiation) across eccentricities, whereas 

greater structural integrity predicted attenuated grad ients and broader, flexible attentional deployment across 

space. Collectively , these results underscore the unique contributions of regional GMV and cortical thickness 

in shaping individual variability in visual attention deployment concerning the affectiv e trait of anxiety .Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 22 

There are reports of partial face information, e.g., the eye region and the eyebrows, sufficient for 

conveying emotions for recognition (Sadr et al. , 2003) . Therefore, in one of the study's goals, we explored 

whether a subtle emotion signal conveyed by the average distance between the two eyes and eyebrow regions 

of human face images presented briefly as pre -cues was sufficient to elicit biases of attention distribution in 

space. We did not observe any biases in attentional deployment by the pre -cues. Although group -level 

performance showed the expected decline with eccentricity, individual gradients exhibited substantial 

variability, including negative value s. In this framework, negative gradients indicate reduced prioritization of 

near space versus peripheral. Such idiosyncratic patterns have been reported previously and reflect individual 

differences in attentional breadth and spatial prioritization rather than measurement unreliability (Greenwood 

& Parasuraman, 1999; Robertson et al. , 2013; Kaur et al. , 2023) . There could be a few re asons for the null 

effects in our results. We presented the images briefly (50 ms) to sufficiently convey the emotion signals, as 

opposed to the no time limit used earlier (Sadr et al. , 2003) . We also excluded the forehead region of the faces 

from the pre -cues, which were found to be informative by Ekman and colleagues (Ekman & Friesen, 1978) ,

and the exclusion of the forehead regions may deplete the information content of the pre -cues to bias 

attentional deployment in space. Moreover, emotional biases on one visual function may not generalize to 

others. For example, while fearful face cues can rapidly capture attention and enhance visual acuity under 

certain conditions, such emotional effects do not necessarily improve performance in more fine -grained visual 

tasks such as shape or colour discrimination (Bocanegra & Zeelenberg, 2011; Del Zotto & Pegna, 2015; Shang 

et al. , 2021) . So, it is possible that at least partial emotion cues comprising the eyes and eyebrows , as 

implemented by us , do not impact gradients in healthy young adults. In our findings, one or more of the above 

reaso ns could have led to the null effects of emotional cues on gradient. 

We observed that the GMV of bilateral cerebellum lobule VI predicts the interaction between gradient and 

trait anxiety. The negative association suggests that cerebellum lobule VI confers greater flexibility in 

attentional deployment, particularly in individuals with lower levels of trait anxiety. Although cerebellar and 

sensorimotor regions are classically associated with motor control, converging evidence demonstrates their Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 23 

involvement in covert spatial attention and predictive attentional timing independent of overt movement. In 

the present task, short cue –target intervals were used to minimize eye movements, and the attention 

gradient was derive d from perceptual efficiency rather than motor output, supporting an attentional 

interpretation of these structural associations. Our findings linking the structural characteristics of cerebellar 

lobule VI to the visual spatial attention gradient align wit h recent fMRI evidence indicating functional 

organization in neighbouring cerebellar regions. Specifically, it was reported th at cerebellar lobule VIIb/VIIIa, 

an area anatomically close to our region of concern being separated by the Crus I/II regions (Lob ule VIIa), 

exhibits an organization similar to the parietal cortex (Brissenden et al. , 2018) . Their study demonstrated that 

the dorsomedial portion of this lobule encodes spatial locations of attention, while the ventromedial portion is 

selectively engaged by increasing working memory demands. These results led the authors to conclud e that 

the cerebellar representation of the visual field parallels the topographic mapping previously documented in 

the parietal and frontal regions of the cerebral cortex. This generally agrees with an earlier study, which also 

reported disturbances of ov ert shift of visual attention in cerebellar patients (Golla et al. , 2005) . Traditionally, 

the cerebellum has been recognized for its role in motor control (Strick et al. , 2009) . However, recent studies 

have illuminated its involvement in higher -order cognitive, social, and emotional processes. The cerebellum 

contributes to executive functions such as planning, attention, cognitive flexibility (Bellebaum & Daum, 

2007) , and interpreting goal -directed actions in social contexts (Van Overwalle et al. , 2019) . Emerging 

evidence also suggests that structural anomalies of the cerebellum may be related to the interplay between the 

affective trait of depression and the severity of clinical symptoms in Autism Spectrum Disorder (Dhar et al. ,

2024) . Notably, the GMV of cerebellar lobule VI is positively correlated with the spontaneity and correct rate 

in a 3-back working memory task (Ding et al. , 2012) . Elsewhere, it was reporte d that the activation of the 

cerebellum lobule VI scaled linearly by the load of the items in the working memory (Kirschen et al. , 2005) .

Furthermore, EEG evidence has established a context -specific causal role of the cerebellum in modulating 

anticipatory neural dynamics underlying temporal prediction, which in turn supports the proactive allocation 

of attentional resources and preparation of adaptive respon ses (Breska & Ivry, 2020) . Additionally, precise 

symptom -lesion mapping of attention deficits has localized the lesions linked with abnormal reaction times in 

a covert visual attention task to cerebellu m lobule VI , amongst others (Baier et al. , 2010) . An earlier study has Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 24 

evidenced double dissociation wherein attention activated an area within lobule VI, and a motor task activated 

a distinct area within the anterior lobe – lobule III –IV (Allen et al. , 1997) . Converging evidence from VBM, 

lesion , functional imaging, and brain stimulation studies demonstrates that cerebellar GMV , particular ly 

within the posterior lobules is critically involved in the rapid and p recise allocation of visuospatial attention. 

This involvement positions the cerebellum as an integral component of the broader cortical attentional 

network. Here, we extend the evidence for the cerebellum’s extra ‑motor roles by demonstrating that 

volumetri c variation in a cerebellar sub -region (lobule VI ) predicts individual differences in visual 

spatial ‑attention deployment, which in turn correlates with trait‑anxiety severity - an association not 

previously documented. 

Structural variability in GMV within well -documented , visuospatial‐relevant cortical regions 

consistently emerges as a fundamental correlate of higher visuospatial cognitive functions. Studies have 

demonstrated that greater GMV in occipitoparietal areas —including the lateral occipital complex (LOC) and 

intraparietal sulcus (IPS) —predicts superior visual working memory and spatial attention performance. For 

instance, individuals exhibiting larger left LOC and bilateral superior IPS volumes showed significantly higher 

capacity and precis ion in visual working memory paradigms, underscoring a direct relationship between 

cortical GMV and representational fidelity in visuospatial tasks (Luck & Vogel, 2013; Fukuda et al. , 2015) .

The IPS of the dorsal visual stream , in particular, has been repeatedly implicated in visuospatial attention and 

working memory, with volume differences in this region correlating with individual variability in visual short -

term memory capacity, which emphasizes the region's map -based architecture and its role in visual spatial 

cognition (Dimond et al. , 2019) . Complementary studies have also highlighted the role of angular gyrus in 

allocating visuospatial attention, where volumetric enhancements likely refine not only spatial orienting and 

dynamic attention shifts (Cattaneo et al. , 2009) but also being causally responsible for coordinate 

transformation while spatial updating (Muggleton et al. , 2008) and guiding visual spatial attention in reaching 

a decision based on the reward -punishment contingencies of the environment (Studer et al. , 2014) . These 

findings agree with functional lesion and neglect studies pointing to IPS and posterior parietal cortex as critical 

hubs for spatial orienting and attentiona l selection (Corbetta & Shulman, 2011; Ptak & Schnider, 2011) .Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 25 

Significantly, emerging neuroimaging evidence now extends this dorsal attention framework to include the 

cerebellum, particularly its posterior lobules, which exhibit robust functional connectivity with core dorsal 

attention network ( DAN ) nodes. Specif ically, lobules VI and VII (including Crus I and II) demonstrate 

synchronized activity with the IPS and frontal eye fields during goal -directed attentional tasks, implicating 

cerebellar sub -regions in modulating the precision and timing of attentional allo cation (Buckner, 2013; 

Brissenden et al ., 2016) . These cerebellar lobules show domain -specific recruitment during visuospatial 

processing and visual working memory, reinforcing that the cerebellum contributes through sensorimotor 

prediction and attentional control mechanisms. Moreover, intri nsic functional connectivity studies reveal a 

reproducible topography within the cerebellum that mirrors the cortical organization of large -scale networks, 

including the DAN, further supporting the cerebellum's role in attentional dynamics (Buckner et al. , 2011; 

Marek et al. , 2018) . As such, individual variability in cerebellar GMV , particularly in DAN -linked lobules, 

may parallel the cortical structural correlates of visuospatial cognition, refining our understanding of 

distributed network interactions that underlie attention and working memory. While these insights have 

illuminate d the cerebellum’s role in domain -general attentional processes, our findings uniquely extend this 

framework by demonstrating that individual differences in cerebellar GMV specifically in lobule VI not only 

predict the gradient of visuospatial attention bu t are also significantly modulated by trait anxiety , a 

dimension of affect that has not been previously integrated into this structural -attentional mapping. This 

interaction between cerebellar morphology and anxiety underscores a previously unreported affe ctive 

modulation of cerebellar contributions to attention, revealing a critical affect -cognition interface within the 

dorsal attention network. By uncovering this structural substrate of anxiety -linked variability in attention 

deployment, our study offers a novel account of how the cerebellum may support adaptive or maladaptive 

tuning of attentional gradients under emotional dispositions .

Our surface -based morphometry analysis also revealed the cortical thickness of the region comprising 

the left inferior frontal gyrus, precentral gyrus, and paracentral lobule to predict the interindividual differences 

of gradient in the context of trait anxiety. The current findings offer insights into the neuroanatomy 

underpinning visuospatial attentional gradients, parti cularly in the context of individual differences in trait Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 26 

anxiety. Specifically, we observed that cortical thickness in the left inferior temporal gyrus and precentral 

gyrus negatively correlated with attention gradient scores, indicating that thicker cort ices in these regions are 

associated with more flexible spatial attention deployment. Notably, we found the involvement of the left 

inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), a region implicated in cognitive control, top -down modulation of attention, and 

resolution of attentional conflict (Aron et al. , 2004; Derrfuss et al. , 2004; Hampshire et al. , 2010) . The IFG 

has been shown to interact with sensorimotor systems to guide goal -directed behavio ur, especially while 

suppressing irrelevant stimuli or ta sk switching - functions highly relevant to flexible visuospatial attention 

(Asplund et al. , 2010; Higo et al. , 2011) . Its structural involvement in our findings suggests that greater cortical 

thickness in the IFG may enhance attentional adaptability, possibly by enabling more effective top -down 

control over motor -preparatory systems during attentional shift s. These results a lign with prior research 

linking motor and premotor regions to attentional control processes, particularly under task demands involving 

spatial orientation and voluntary attentional shifts (Corbetta et al. , 2008; Smith, 2015) . Crucially , we extend 

this literature by demonstrating that trait anxiety significantly moderates this relationship, such that individuals 

higher in anxiety show a stronger inverse association between cortical thickness and gradient. This su ggests 

that in high -anxiety individuals, motor -associated cortical regions may play a more prominent role in 

supporting attentional flexibility —possibly as a compensatory mechanism to counteract anxiety -related 

attentional narrowing (Bishop, 2009; Sylvester et al. , 2012) . While previous studies have associated trait 

anxiety with functional alterations in attentional control netwo rks - dorsolateral prefrontal co rtex, anterior 

cingulate cortex (Bishop, 2007; Etkin et al. , 2009) , our findings are among the first to implicate structural 

cortical differences —specifically in precentral and parac entral regions in anxiety -linked modulation of 

visuospatial attention gradients. Moreover, the observation that this modulation occurs in sensorimotor areas 

reinforces emerging models proposing that attentional control engages motor -preparatory systems eve n in 

covert tasks (Rushworth et al. , 2001; Moore & Fallah, 2004) . The cortical regions identified by the gradient -

only and gradient × trait anxiety analyses were anatomically adjacent yet non -overlapping, a pattern consistent 

with the distinct processes captured by each analysis: the former indexing affect -independ ent attentional 

architecture, and the latter isolating anxiety -specific modulation of attentional control. Taken together, these 

findings highlight a novel affect -structural interaction, wherein trait anxiety dynamically influences the Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 27 

relationship between cortical architecture and attentional flexibility, offering new avenues for understanding 

the neural basis of individual variability in cognitive -affective integration. It’s noteworthy however, that the 

cortical thickness interaction finding should be int erpreted cautiously. While the effect survived the predefined 

statistical threshold, it was comparatively closer to the significance threshold and therefore, may be more 

sensitive to sampling variability. Replication in larger independent cohorts will be important to establish the 

robustness and generalizability of this association. Our present findings offer convergent evidence that 

GMV and cortical thickness represent structural ly dissociable but functionally complementary substrates 

underpinning individual variability in visuospatial attention, especially in relation to trait anxiety. Gray matter 

volume, particularly in bilateral cerebellar lobule VI, was found to predict the in teraction between trait anxiety 

and attentional gradient negatively — an association that aligns with emerging models of cerebellar 

involvement in higher -order cognitive and affective processes (Stoodley & Schmahmann, 2009; Buckner, 

2013) . Broadly, GMV has been interpreted as reflecting cellular density, dendritic arborization, and glial 

support (Panizzon et al. , 2009) , and volumetric enhancement in cerebellar lobule VI has been associated with 

more efficient working memory, attentional timing, and proactive cognitive control (Kirschen et al. , 2005; 

Ding et al. , 2012; Breska & Ivry, 2020) . Alongside, cortical thickness in the left precentral gyrus and 

paracent ral lobule — regions implicated in voluntary orienting and motor -preparatory aspects of attention -

was also negatively associated with attention gradients, particularly among individuals with higher anxiety 

levels. Cortical thickness, which typically refle cts intracortical cytoarchitectural maturity including dendritic 

complexity and synaptic density (Narr et al. , 2007; Fjell & Walhovd, 2010) , has been linked to top -down 

attentional modulation and flexibility during goal -directed tasks (Moore & Fallah, 2004; Corbetta et al. , 2008) .

Notably, the dissociation between GMV and cortical thickness in predicting attention gradient sugge sts that 

while cerebellar volume may govern predictive timing and spatial encoding of attention shifts, sensorimotor 

cortical thickness may sup port the voluntary reorientation and dynamic updating of attention in affectively 

challenging contexts. Together, the structural integrity of these neurobiological substrates may interact to 

optimize more adaptive, fine -grained deployment of visual -spatial attention , with their influence modulated 

by dispositional affective traits such as anxiety. Here, the term “str uctural integrity” refers specifically to local 

gray -matter characteristics indexed by GMV and cortical thickness, rather than to white -matter tract coherence Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 28 

or inter -regional connectivity. This structure -function -behaviour link offers explanatory insights into how 

distributed neuroanatomical features, particularly within cerebellar and premotor circuits , may alleviate or 

amplify trait anxiety -related constraints on controlling visual attention across points in space .

Finally, we identi fy a few aspects of the present study that may be considered for interpreting our present 

results and for the future. First, microsaccades, small eye movements, may have influenced covert attentional 

shifts (Gu et al. , 2024) , though this remains speculative without eye -tracking data. Second, gender -related 

trends in the relationship between structural brain metrics and attentional gradient did not reach statistical 

significance, likely due to limited gender -specific sample sizes. Gender differences in anxiety -related 

neurocognitive manifestations (McLean et al. , 2011) warrant further exploration in larger, gender -balanced 

samples. Third, although our sample was adequately powered, a larger sam ple size would help validate these 

findings. Fourth, although clusters in the SBM analysis were identified using a cluster -defining threshold of p

< 0.005 (uncorrected), supported by sensitivity analyses in a prior study (Lerch & Evans, 2005) , confirming 

these findings with a more stringent threshold of p < 0.001 would be preferable. Fifth , the overlap between 

trait anxiety and depression (Knowles & Olatunji, 2020) may mean our results may reflect broader negative 

affectivity, which future studies should explore more explicit ly. Sixth, while state anxiety primarily modulates 

transient perceptual gain and emotional response amplitude, particularly under conditions of threat, the present 

findings highlight trait anxiety as a stable affective disposition that interacts with cereb ellar and sensorimotor 

structure to shape baseline visuospatial attention gradients. Future work may explicitly examine the 

contribution of state anxiety within this framework. Seventh, although the present study primarily used an 

endpoint -based Near –Far g radient metric, supplementary analyses showed that the principal findings were 

highly consistent with an alternative three -eccentricity linear slope -based measure, supporting the robustness 

of the reported results across different methods of quantifying at tentional gradients . Eighth , future studies 

incorporating diffusion tensor imaging or tract -based morphometry would be valuable for directly assessing 

white -matter connectivity and cerebello -cortical communication, thereby complementing the present gray -

ma tter -focused findings. Finally, because the present study employed a correlational design, the observed 

relationships between regional brain morphology, trait anxiety, and visuospatial attention gradients should be Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 29 

interpreted as associations rather than evidence of causal or m echanistic influence. Future studies will be 

necessary to determine the directionality and causal basis of these structure -behaviour relationships .

In conclusion, our study provides evidence that individual differences in the structural architecture of both 

cerebellar and cortical regions predict variability in visuospatial attentional deployment as a function of trait 

anxiety. While partial facial emotion cues failed to elicit spatial attentional biases, volumetric and cortical 

thickness analyses reveal ed dissociable yet complementary contributions of bilateral cerebellar lobule VI and 

left inferior frontal, precentral –paracentral regions in modulating attention gradients. Specifically, greater 

cerebellar GMV and sensorimotor cortical thickness are assoc iated with attenuated gradients, particularly in 

individuals with lower anxiety levels, suggesting more flexible allocation of spatial attention. These findings 

extend existing models of the dorsal attention network by incorporating cerebellar regions into affectively 

modulated attentional control, highlighting a previously less -known structural mechanism through which 

anxiety influences visuospatial attention. By further integrating surface -based morphometry and machine 

learning with trait -level affective data, this study offers a framework for understanding how cerebellar and 

cortical morphometry may mutually shape cognitive -affective functions. Future studies incorporating eye -

tracking, gender -balanced samples, and refined affective measures are essential to clarify the specificity of 

these findings and their translational relevance to anxiety -linked attentional dysfunctions. Overall, our results 

agree with the emerging yet underreported cerebellar -cortical structural substrate for individual variability i n

attention control under emotional dispositions, opening new avenues for personalized interventions targeting 

anxiety -related attentional dysregulation. 

Author contributions 

Conceptualization: Mrinmoy Chakrabarty, Varsha Singh; Methodology: Suhail Rafi q Mir, Dolcy Dhar, 

Prakrati Gutpa, Ishita Singh, Mrinmoy Chakrabarty; Formal analysis and investigation: Mrinmoy 

Chakrabarty, Suhail Rafiq Mir, Ishita Singh, Varsha Singh; Writing: Mrinmoy Chakrabarty, Suhail Rafiq Mir, Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 30 

Varsha Singh; Funding acquisition: Mrinmoy Chakrabarty, Varsha Singh; Supervision: Mrinmoy 

Chakrabarty, Varsha Singh. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest 

The authors declare no conflicts of interest. 

Funding 

The research was funded by the Multi -Instit ute Faculty Interdisciplinary Research Project grant (MFIRP -222) 

jointly awarded by the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi and the Indraprastha Institute of Information 

Technology Delhi to Dr. Mrinmoy Chakrabarty and Dr. Varsha Singh as well as the Science and Engineering 

Research Board Core Research Grant awarded to Dr. Mrinmoy Chakrabarty (SERB -CRG/2022/008119). Dr 

Suhail Rafiq Mir was supported by a Post -doctoral Fellowship from the Centre for Design and New Media (A 

TCS Foundation Initiative supp orted by the Tata Consultancy Services) at IIIT -Delhi. The funders were not 

involved in the study design, collection, analysis, interpretation of data, the writing of this article, or the 

decision to submit it for publication. 

Data availability: The data and codes that led to the reported results can be accessed here : 

https://github.com/research -archive/Attention -Gradient Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 31 

References 

Allen, G., Buxton, R.B., Wong, E.C., & Courchesne, E. (1997) Attentional activation of the cerebellum 

independent of motor involvement. Science (80 -. ). , 275 , 1940 –1943. 

Aron, A.R., Robbins, T.W., & Poldrack, R.A. (2004) Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. Trends 

Cogn. Sci. ,. 

Asplund, C.L., Todd, J.J., Snyder, A.P., & Marois, R. (2010) A central role for the lateral prefrontal cortex 

in goal -directed and stim ulus -driven attention. Nat. Neurosci. , 13 , 507 –512. 

Baier, B., Dieterich, M., Stoeter, P., Birklein, F., & Müller, N.G. (2010) Anatomical correlate of impaired 

covert visual attentional processes in patients with cerebellar lesions. J. Neurosci. , 30 .

Barbo t, A. & Carrasco, M. (2018) Emotion and anxiety potentiate the way attention alters visual appearance. 

Sci. Rep. , 8.

Bellebaum, C. & Daum, I. (2007) Cerebellar involvement in executive control. Cerebellum ,. 

Bergmann, J., Genç, E., Kohler, A., Singer, W., & Pearson, J. (2016) Neural Anatomy of Primary Visual 

Cortex Limits Visual Working Memory. Cereb. Cortex , 26 , 43 –50. 

Bishop, S.J. (2007) Neurocognitive mechanisms of anxiety: an integrative account. Trends Cogn. Sci. ,. 

Bishop, S.J. (2009) Trait anxiety and impoverished prefrontal control of attention. Nat. Neurosci. , 12 , 92 –

98. 

Bocanegra, B.R. & Zeelenberg, R. (2011) Emotional cues enhance the attentional effects on spatial and 

temporal resolution. Psychon. Bull. Rev. , 18 , 1071 –1076. 

Bradley, B.P., Mogg, K., & Millar, N.H. (2000) Covert and overt orienting of attention to emotional faces in 

anxiety. Cogn. Emot. , 14 , 789 –808. 

Bradley, B.P., Mogg, K., White, J., Groom, C., & De Bono, J. (1999) Attentional bias for emotional faces in 

generalized anxiety disorder. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. , 38 , 267 –278. 

Breska, A. & Ivry, R.B. (2020) Context -specific control over the neural dynamics o f temporal attention by 

the human cerebellum. Sci. Adv. , 6.

Brissenden, J.A., Levin, E.J., Osher, D.E., Halko, M.A., & Somers, D.C. (2016) Functional evidence for a 

cerebellar node of the dorsal attention network. J. Neurosci. , 36 , 6083 –6096. 

Brissenden, J .A., Tobyne, S.M., Osher, D.E., Levin, E.J., Halko, M.A., & Somers, D.C. (2018) Topographic 

Cortico -cerebellar Networks Revealed by Visual Attention and Working Memory. Curr. Biol. , 28 ,

3364 -3372.e5. 

Buckner, R.L. (2013) The cerebellum and cognitive function: 25 years of insight from anatomy and 

neuroimaging. Neuron ,. 

Buckner, R.L., Krienen, F.M., Castellanos, A., Diaz, J.C., & Thomas Yeo, B.T. (2011) The organization of 

the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J. Neurophysiol. , 106 , 2322 –2345. 

Carrasco, M. (2011) Visual attention: The past 25 years. Vision Res. ,. 

Cattaneo, Z., Silvanto, J., Pascual -Leone, A., & Battelli, L. (2009) The role of the angular gyrus in the 

modulat ion of visuospatial attention by the mental number line. Neuroimage , 44 , 563 –568. 

Chakrabarty, M., Atsumi, T., Kaneko, A., Fukatsu, R., & Ide, M. (2021) State anxiety modulates the effect 

of emotion cues on visual temporal sensitivity in autism spectrum di sorder. Eur. J. Neurosci. , 54 ,

4682 –4694. 

Chakrabarty, M. & Wada, M. (2020) Perceptual effects of fast and automatic visual ensemble statistics from 

faces in individuals with typical development and autism spectrum conditions. Sci. Rep. ,. 

Corbetta, M., Pat el, G., & Shulman, G.L. (2008) The Reorienting System of the Human Brain: From 

Environment to Theory of Mind. Neuron ,. 

Corbetta, M. & Shulman, G.L. (2011) Spatial neglect and attention networks. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. , 34 ,

569 –599. 

Del Zotto, M. & Pegna, A.J . (2015) Processing of masked and unmasked emotional faces under different 

attentional conditions: An electrophysiological investigation. Front. Psychol. , 6.

Derrfuss, J., Brass, M., & Yves Von Cramon, D. (2004) Cognitive control in the posterior frontolat eral 

cortex: Evidence from common activations in task coordination, interference control, and working 

memory. Neuroimage , 23 , 604 –612. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 32 

Dhar, D., Chaturvedi, M., Sehwag, S., Malhotra, C., Udit, Saraf, C., & Chakrabarty, M. (2024) Gray Matter 

Volume Correlat es of Co -Occurring Depression in Autism Spectrum Disorder. J. Autism Dev. Disord. ,

1–14. 

Dimond, D., Perry, R., Iaria, G., & Bray, S. (2019) Visuospatial short -term memory and dorsal visual gray 

matter volume. Cortex , 113 , 184 –190. 

Ding, H., Qin, W., Jiang , T., Zhang, Y., & Yu, C. (2012) Volumetric variation in subregions of the 

cerebellum correlates with working memory performance. Neurosci. Lett. , 508 , 47 –51. 

Dodd, H.F., Vogt, J., Turkileri, N., & Notebaert, L. (2017) Task relevance of emotional informati on affects 

anxiety -linked attention bias in visual search. Biol. Psychol. , 122 , 13 –20. 

Dominguez -Borras, J. & Vuilleumier, P. (2013) Affective biases in attention and perception. Cambridge 

Handb. Affect. Neurosci. , 331 –356. 

Ekman, P. & Friesen, W. V (1978) Facial Action Coding System: : A Technique for the Measurement of 

Facial Movement. Consulting Psychologists Press, Palo Alto, CA. PsycTESTS Dataset , 17 .

Etkin, A., Prater, K.E., Schatzberg, A.F., Menon, V., & Greicius, M.D. (2009) Disrupted amygdalar 

subregion functional connectivity and evidence of a compensatory network in generalized anxiety 

disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry , 66 , 1361 –1372. 

Fani, N., Jovanovic, T., Ely, T.D., Bradley, B., Gutman, D., Tone, E.B., & Ressler, K.J. (2012) Neural 

correlates of attention bias to threat in post -traumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychol. , 90 , 134 –142. 

Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Lang, A. -G., & Buchner, A. (2009) Statistical power analyses using G*Power 3.1: 

Tests for correlation and reg ression analyses. Behav. Res. Methods , 41 , 1149. 

Ferneyhough, E., Kim, M.K., Phelps, E.A., & Carrasco, M. (2013) Anxiety modulates the effects of emotion 

and attention on early vision. Cogn. Emot. , 27 , 166 –176. 

Fjell, A.M. & Walhovd, K.B. (2010) Structural brain changes in aging: Courses, causes and cognitive 

consequences. Rev. Neurosci. ,. 

Fox, E. (1996) Selective processing of threatening words in anxiety: The role of awareness. Cogn. Emot. ,

10 , 449 –480. 

Fox, E. (2002) Processing emotional facial expressio ns: The role of anxiety and awareness. Cogn. Affect. 

Behav. Neurosci. , 2, 52 –63. 

Fox, E., Russo, R., Bowles, R., & Dutton, K. (2001) Do threatening stimuli draw or hold visual attention in 

subclinical anxiety? J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. , 130 , 681 –700. 

Fukuda, K., Woodman, G.F., & Vogel, E.K. (2015) Individual Differences in Visual Working Memory 

Capacity: Contributions of Attentional Control to Storage. In Mechanisms of Sensory Working 

Memory: Attention and Perfomance XXV . pp. 105 –119. 

Gary Bradski (200 0) The OpenCV Library. Dr. Dobb’s J. Softw. Tools , 120 , 122 –125. 

Gaser, C., Dahnke, R., Kurth, K., Luders, E., & Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (2020) A 

computational Anatomy Toolbox for the Analysis of Structural MRI Data. Neuroimage , 2016 , 3 36 –

348. 

Georgiou, G.A., Bleakley, C., Hayward, J., Russo, R., Dutton, K., Eltiti, S., & Fox, E. (2005) Focusing on 

fear: Attentional disengagement from emotional faces. Vis. cogn. , 12 , 145 –158. 

Golla, H., Thier, P., & Haarmeier, T. (2005) Disturbed overt b ut normal covert shifts of attention in adult 

cerebellar patients. Brain , 128 , 1525 –1535. 

Greenwood, P.M. & Parasuraman, R. (1999) Scale of attentional focus in visual search. Percept. 

Psychophys. , 61 .

Gu, Q., Zhang, Q., Han, Y., Li, P., Gao, Z., & Shen, M. (2024) Microsaccades reflect attention shifts: a mini 

review of 20 years of microsaccade research. Front. Psychol. ,. 

Hampshire, A., Chamberlain, S.R., Monti, M.M., Duncan, J., & Owen, A.M. (2010) The role of the right 

inferior frontal gyrus: inhibition and attentional control. Neuroimage , 50 , 1313 –1319. 

Higo, T., Mars, R.B., Boorman, E.D., Buch, E.R., & Rushworth, M.F.S. (2011) Distributed and causal 

influence of frontal operculum in task control. Proc . Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 108 , 4230 –4235. 

Kaur, G., Anand, R., & Chakrabarty, M. (2022) Trait Anxiety Moderates Negative Affect -Modulated 

Distribution of Visuo -Spatial Attention. SSRN Electron. J. ,. 

Kaur, G., Anand, R., & Chakrabarty, M. (2023) Trait An xiety Influences Negative Affect -modulated 

Distribution of Visuospatial Attention. Neuroscience , 509 , 145 –156. 

Kazemi, V. & Sullivan, J. (2014) One millisecond face alignment with an ensemble of regression trees. In Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 33 

Proceedings of the IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .

Kirschen, M.P., Chen, S.H.A., Schraedley -Desmond, P., & Desmond, J.E. (2005) Load - and practice -

dependent increases in cerebro -cerebellar activation in verbal working memory: An fMRI study. 

Neuroimage , 24 .

Knowles, K.A. & Olatunji, B.O. (2020) Specificity of trait anxiety in anxiety and depression: Meta -analysis 

of the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory. Clin. Psychol. Rev. ,. 

Lerch, J.P. & Evans, A.C. (2005) Cortical thickness analysis examined through powe r analysis and a 

population simulation. Neuroimage , 24 , 163 –173. 

Li, W., Zinbarg, R.E., Boehm, S.G., & Paller, K.A. (2008) Neural and behavioral evidence for affective 

priming from unconsciously perceived emotional facial expressions and the influence of t rait anxiety. J. 

Cogn. Neurosci. , 20 .

Luck, S.J. & Vogel, E.K. (2013) Visual working memory capacity: From psychophysics and neurobiology 

to individual differences. Trends Cogn. Sci. ,. 

Lundqvist, D., Flykt, A., Ohman, A. (1998) The Karolinska Directed Emot ional Faces -KDEF,CD ROM .

Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Psychology section, Karolinska Institutet. 

Marek, S., Siegel, J.S., Gordon, E.M., Raut, R. V., Gratton, C., Newbold, D.J., Ortega, M., Laumann, T.O., 

Adeyemo, B., Miller, D.B., Zheng, A., Lopez, K.C., Berg, J.J., Coalson, R.S., Nguyen, A.L., Dierker, 

D., Van, A.N., Hoyt, C.R., McDermott, K.B., Norris, S.A., Shimony, J.S., Snyder, A.Z., Nelson, S.M., 

Barch, D.M., Schlaggar, B.L., Raichle, M.E., Petersen, S.E., Greene, D.J., & Dosenbach, N.U.F. (20 18) 

Spatial and Temporal Organization of the Individual Human Cerebellum. Neuron , 100 , 977 -993.e7. 

Mathews, A. & MacLeod, C. (1994) Cognitive approaches to emotion and emotional disorders. Annu. Rev. 

Psychol. , 45 .

McLean, C.P., Asnaani, A., Litz, B.T., & Hofmann, S.G. (2011) Gender differences in anxiety disorders: 

Prevalence, course of illness, comorbidity and burden of illness. J. Psychiatr. Res. , 45 , 1027 –1035. 

Miller, G.A. & Chapman, J.P. (2001) Misunderstanding analysis of covariance. J. Abnorm. Psychol. , 110 .

Mogg, K., Mathews, A., & Weinman, J. (1989) Selective processing of threat cues in anxiety states: A 

replication. Behav. Res. Ther. , 27 .

Mogg, K., Millar, N., & Bradley, B.P. (2000) Biases in eye movements to threatening facial expressions in 

generalized anxiety disorder and depressive disorder. J. Abnorm. Psychol. , 109 , 695 –704. 

Moore, T. & Fallah, M. (2004) Microstimulation of the Frontal Eye Field and Its Effects on Covert Spatial 

Attention. J. Neurophys iol. , 91 , 152 –162. 

Muggleton, N.G., Cowey, A., & Walsh, V. (2008) The role of the angular gyrus in visual conjunction search 

investigated using signal detection analysis and transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neuropsychologia ,

46 , 2198 –2202. 

Narr, K.L., Woods, R.P., Thompson, P.M., Szeszko, P., Robinson, D., Dimtcheva, T., Gurbani, M., Toga, 

A.W., & Bilder, R.M. (2007) Relationships between IQ and regional cortical gray matter thickness in 

healthy adults. Cereb. Cortex , 17 , 2163 –2171. 

Osinsky, R., Gebhardt, H., Alexander, N., & Hennig, J. (2012) Trait anxiety and the dynamics of attentional 

control. Biol. Psychol. , 89 , 252 –259. 

Panizzon, M.S., Fennema -Notestine, C., Eyler, L.T., Jernigan, T.L., Prom -Wormley, E., Neale, M., 

Jacobson, K., Lyons, M.J., Grant, M.D., Franz, C.E., Xian, H., Tsuang, M., Fischl, B., Seidman, L., 

Dale, A., & Kremen, W.S. (2009) Distinct genetic influences on cortical surface area and cortical 

thickness. Cereb. Cortex , 19 , 2728 –2735. 

Penny, W., Friston, K., Ashburner, J., Kiebel, S., & Nichols, T. (2007) Statistical Parametric Mapping: The 

Analysis of Functional Brain Images , Statistical Parametric Mapping: The Analysis of Functional Brain 

Images. 

Ptak, R. & Schnider, A. (2011) The attention network of the human brain: Rel ating structural damage 

associated with spatial neglect to functional imaging correlates of spatial attention. Neuropsychologia ,

49 , 3063 –3070. 

Qin, S., Young, C.B., Duan, X., Chen, T., Supekar, K., & Menon, V. (2014) Amygdala subregional structure 

and int rinsic functional connectivity predicts individual differences in anxiety during early childhood. 

Biol. Psychiatry , 75 .

Robertson, C.E., Kravitz, D.J., Freyberg, J., Baron -Cohen, S., & Baker, C.I. (2013) central vision: Sharper 

gradient of spatial attention in autism. J. Neurosci. , 33 , 6776 –6781. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 34 

Rushworth, M.F.S., Ellison, A., & Walsh, V. (2001) Complementary localization and lateralization of 

orienting and motor attention. Nat. Neurosci. , 4, 656 –661. 

Sadr, J., J arudi, I., & Sinha, P. (2003) The role of eyebrows in face recognition. Perception , 32 , 285 –293. 

Shang, Z., Wang, Y., & Bi, T. (2021) How Does Fearful Emotion Affect Visual Attention? Front. Psychol. ,

11 .

Smith, D. (2015) The Oxford Handbook of Attention , Perception. Oxford University Press, USA. 

Spielberger, C.D., Gorsuch, R.L., Lushene, R., Vagg, P.R., Jacobs, G.A. (1983) State -Trait Anxiety 

Inventory for Adults - Manual, Instrument and Scoring Guide. Consult. Psychol. Press. Inc. Mind 

Gard. Inc. ,. 

Spielb erger, C.D. (1983) Manual for the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory STAI (Form Y) (&quot;Self -

Evaluation Questionnaire&quot;). CA Mind Gard. , 29 .

Spielberger, C.D. (2022) Anxiety . Routledge. 

Stoodley, C.J. & Schmahmann, J.D. (2009) Functional topography in the human cerebellum: A meta -

analysis of neuroimaging studies. Neuroimage , 44 , 489 –501. 

Strick, P.L., Dum, R.P., & Fiez, J.A. (2009) Cerebellum and nonmotor function. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. ,. 

Studer, B., Cen, D., & Walsh, V. (2014) The angular gyrus and visuosp atial attention in decision -making 

under risk. Neuroimage , 103 , 75 –80. 

Sylvester, C.M., Corbetta, M., Raichle, M.E., Rodebaugh, T.L., Schlaggar, B.L., Sheline, Y.I., Zorumski, 

C.F., & Lenze, E.J. (2012) Functional network dysfunction in anxiety and anxiety disorders. Trends 

Neurosci. ,. 

Townsend, J.T. & Ashby, F.G. (1978) Methods of Modeling Capacity in Simple Processing Systems. Cogn. 

theory (Volume 3) ,. 

Tzourio -Mazoyer, N., Landeau, B., Papathanassiou, D., Crivello, F., Etard, O., Delcroix, N., Mazoyer, B. , & 

Joliot, M. (2002) Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM using a macroscopic anatomical 

parcellation of the MNI MRI single -subject brain. Neuroimage , 15 , 273 –289. 

Van Overwalle, F., De Coninck, S., Heleven, E., Perrotta, G., Taib, N.O. Ben , Manto, M., & Mariën, P. 

(2019) The role of the cerebellum in reconstructing social action sequences: A pilot study. Soc. Cogn. 

Affect. Neurosci. , 14 , 549 –558. 

Veerapa, E., Grandgenevre, P., El Fayoumi, M., Vinnac, B., Haelewyn, O., Szaffarczyk, S., Vaiva, G., & 

D’Hondt, F. (2020) Attentional bias towards negative stimuli in healthy individuals and the effects of 

trait anxiety. Sci. Rep. , 10 .

Vuilleumier, P. & Dr iver, J. (2007) Modulation of visual processing by attention and emotion: Windows on 

causal interactions between human brain regions. In Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: 

Biological Sciences . pp. 837 –855. 

Whalen, P.J., Shin, L.M., McInerne y, S.C., Fischer, H., Wright, C.I., & Rauch, S.L. (2001) A Functional 

MRI Study of Human Amygdala Responses to Facial Expressions of Fear Versus Anger. Emotion , 1.

Wiedemann, K. (2015) Anxiety and Anxiety Disorders. In International Encyclopedia of the Soc ial & 

Behavioral Sciences: Second Edition . pp. 804 –810. 

Yzerbyt, V.Y., Muller, D., & Judd, C.M. (2004) Adjusting researchers’ approach to adjustment: On the use 

of covariates when testing interactions. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. , 40 .

Table 1: Demographic Information of the Participants Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 35 

Particulars Ratio/Mean ± Std. deviation 

(Range) 

Gender ratio 

(males : females) 

37:23 

(ratio) 

Age in years 22.8±3.8 

(18 -31) 

STAI -Trait 48.78±5.20 

(37 -65) 

STAI -State 43.52±5.19 

(28 -57) 

Note. STAI State Trait Anxiety Inventory Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 36 

Table 2 

Results of brain -wide statistical analyses 

Analysis Brain Region Peak MNI 

Coordinates 

Cluster Size (# 

voxels, A &B; # 

vertices, C & D) 

Cluster -level 

p-FWE 

X Y Z

A) rGMV vs 

Attention 

gradient 

regressio 

n

Right Cerebellum 

Lobule VI 

33 -56 -28 7 0.027 

B) rGMV vs 

(Attentio 

n

gradient 

x Trait 

anxiety 

interactio 

n term 

regressio 

n

Right Cerebellum 

Lobule VI 

Left Cerebellum 

Lobule VI 

33 

-21 

-57 

-60 

-28 

-26 

1964 

871 

0.001 

0.022 

C) Cortical 

thickness 

vs 

Attention 

gradient 

regressio 

n

Frontal Inf Tri Left 

Left Precentral 

Gyrus 

-40 

-45 

23 

-1

23 

36 

535 0.022 

D) Cortical 

thickness 

vs 

(Attentio 

n

gradient 

x Trait 

anxiety 

interactio 

n term) 

regressio 

n

Left Precentral 

Gyrus 

Left Paracentral 

Lobule 

Left Precentral 

Gyrus 

-23 

-13 

-40 

-24 

-21 

-20 

66 

72 

59 

446 0.049 

Note. MNI Montreal Neurological Institute , p FWE Family -Wise Error corrected p-value. All p-values 

reported are family -wise error corrected (p -FWE), as detailed in the Methods. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 37 Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 38 

Figure 1. Behavioural task design . (A) The timeline of the events of one trial of the behavioural task. All 

temporal parameters were fixed. The inter -stimulus interval (ISI) was programmed as 21 frames on a 144 Hz 

monitor (1 frame = 6.9 ms), corresponding to 144.9 ms and therefore shown as ~150 ms for schematic clarity. 

(B) The different image primes convey partial facial emotion Information (Fear, FE; Neutral, NE; 

Scramb led/Null). Arrows indicate the vertical distance from the centre of the pupil to the eyebrow; this feature 

was illustrative and not experimentally manipulated. (C) The three vertical eccentricities/spatial positions 

(±1.5, 3, 6 degrees) were measured from the imaginary position (black, open circle; 5 degrees from the screen 

centre) of the attention cue presentation on either half of the screen. The targets were randomly presented at 

ea ch eccentricity, either above/below or left/right side, relative to the screen centre. The distractor was always 

presented at a position diametrically opposite to the target (180 degrees). 

Figure 2. Effects of emotions on the visuospatial attention gradi ent. Plots showing negative inverse 

efficiency scores (nIES) at three spatial target eccentricities for an individual participant (line and marker) in 

the Neutral (NE, black circles), Fear (FE, blue triangles), and Scrambled (Scr, magenta squares) conditio ns. 

Figure 3. Relationship of GMV with Attention Gradient and Trait Anxiety. (A) Negative correlation 

between attention gradient and GMV in the right cerebellar lobule VI. (B) A scatter plot shows the correlation 

in (A). (C) Correlation between the inter action term of attention gradient × trait anxiety and bilateral cerebellar 

GMV. (D) A scatter plot illustrates the correlation in (C). (E) Scatter plot illustrating the relationship between 

rGMV in bilateral cerebellum lobule VI and the width of spatial at tention modulated by trait anxiety severity. 

The width measure was operationalized as the inverse of the Euclidean norm -based composite attention 

gradient (Width = 1/‖ gradient ‖₂), such that larger values indicate broader spatial attention (shallower 

gradie nts). Each circular marker represents one participant. Marker size is scaled proportionally to the 

magnitude of the width measure (1/‖ gradient ‖₂), with larger markers indicating broader attentional spread / 

more flexible attention. Marker colour and the co lour bar encode trait anxiety severity. The figure visualizes 

how cerebellar GMV predicts the width of attention, and how this relationship is modulated by trait anxiety 

severity. (F) Probability density plot of the null distribution of Pearson's correlati on coefficients ( r) from 2,000 Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 39 

random permutations, estimating the null hypothesis that the empirical ( r) does not differ from zero for 

significance testing. The red dashed vertical line represents the empirical cross -validated ( r). Thresholded 

statistical maps along w ith their respective colour bars are visualised using the MNI 152 standard template in 

MRIcroGL for (A) and (C). Least squares trend lines (broken black, red [high anxiety subset], and blue [low 

anxiety subset]) are shown in (B) and (D). Predi ction intervals (dashed black lines) are shown in E. 

Figure 4. Relationship of cortical thickness with Attention Gradient and Trait Anxiety. 

Negative correlation between attention gradient and cortical thickness in the left (inferior frontal gyrus + 

precentral gyrus) . (B) A scatter plot shows the correlation in (A). (C) Correlation between the interaction term 

of attention gradient × trait anxiety and the cortical thickness of the left (precentral gyrus + paracentral lobule) .

(D) A scatter plot illust rates the correlation in (C). (E) Scatter plot illustrating the relationship between cortical 

thickness of the left (precentral gyrus + paracentral lobule) and the width of spatial attention modulated by 

trait anxiety severity. The width measure was operat ionalized as the inverse of the Euclidean norm -based 

composite attention gradient (Width = 1/‖ gradient ‖₂), such that larger values indicate broader spatial attention 

(shallower gradients). Each circular marker represents one participant. Marker size is sca led proportionally to 

the magnitude of the width measure (1/‖ gradient ‖₂), with larger markers indicating broader attentional spread 

/ more flexible attention. Marker colour and the colour bar encode trait anxiety severity. The figure visualizes 

how cortica l thickness predicts the width of attention, and how this relationship is modulated by trait anxiety 

severity. (F) Probability density plot of the null distribution of Pearson’s correlation coefficients ( r) from 2,000 

random permutations, estimating the nu ll hypothesis that the empirical ( r) does not differ from zero for 

significance testing. The red dashed vertical line represents the empirical cross -validated ( r). Thresholded 

statistical maps along with their respective colour bars are visualised using th e inflated FSAverage template 

in the CAT12 toolbox in (A) and (C). Least squares trend lines (broken black, red [high anxiety subset], and 

blue [low anxiety subset]) are shown in (B) and (D), and prediction intervals (dashed black lines) are shown 

in E. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 40 

Abbreviations 

AAL3 – Automated Anatomical Labeling atlas (version 3) 

AMAP – Adaptive Maximum a Posteriori 

ANCOVA – Analysis of Covariance 

ANOVA – Analysis of Variance 

CAT12 – Computational Anatomy Toolbox (version 12) 

CSF – Cerebrospinal Fluid 

DAN – Dorsal Attention Network 

EEG – Electroencephalography 

FE – Fear condition (Fearful emotion) 

FOV – Field of View 

FSAverage – FreeSurfer Average Template 

FWE – Family -Wise Error 

FWHM – Full Width at Half Maximum 

GAD – Generalized Anxiety Disorder 

GM – Gray Matter 

GMV – Gray Matter Volume 

IFG – Inferior Frontal Gyrus 

IQR – Image Quality Rating 

IPS – Intraparietal Sulcus 

ISI – Inter -Stimulus Interval 

KDEF – Karolinska Directed Emotional Faces Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 41 

LOC – Lateral Occipital Complex 

MNI – Montreal Neurological Institute 

MRI – Magnetic Resonance Imaging 

nIES – Negative Inverse Efficiency Score 

PBT – Projection -Based Thickness 

PVE – Partial Volume Estimation 

rGMV – Regional Gray Matter Volume 

RT – Reaction Time 

SBM – Surface -Based Morphometry 

SPM – Statistical Parametric Mapping 

STAI – State –Trait Anxiety Inventory 

STAI -T – State –Trait Anxiety Inventory – Trait subscale 

STAI -S – State –Trait Anxiety Inventory – State subscale 

TIV – Total Intracranial Volume 

TR – Repetition Time 

TE – Echo Time 

VBM – Voxel -Based Morphometry 

VWM – Visual Working Memory 

V1 – Primary Visual Cortex Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 42 

Figure 1 Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 43 

Figure 2 Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 44 

Figure 3Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 45 

# Figur e 4 Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 46 

# Supple mentary Information 

1. Supplementary Analysis 1 

To ascertain the main effect of eccentricity on the attentional efficiency, the nIES values across three emotions 

were averaged at each eccentricity for each participant and entered into a one -way repeated -measures ANOVA 

with eccentricity condition as a within -subject factor (1.5º, 3º, 6º). Assumptions of normality were largely met 

(Lilliefors test; p values of two groups = 0. 5) but not sphericity (Mauchly’s test: W = 0. 73 , p = 0. 0001 ). Thus, 

Greenhouse -Geisser corrected values are reported here. The main effect of Eccentricity was significant on the 

nIES scores ( F(2, 118) = 13.56 , p = 0. 000035 , partial η² = 0. 19 ; Fig. 2), indicating that attentional efficiency 

at spatial loci fell off with increasing eccentricity from the centre. 

2. Supplementary Analysis 2 

Pearson’s correlations indicated that neither the nIES values at each eccentricity (for the three emotional 

conditions) nor the s ingle composite gradient (computed across the three emotion conditions) were 

significantly associated with trait anxiety (all uncorrected p > .05; see Supplementary Table 1) 

Supplementary Table 1 

Predictor Pearsons ’ r p value CI Lower CI Upper 

Neutral -1.5  0.05075771 0.70012981 -0.2058197 0.30080544 

Neutral -3 -0.0812386 0.53719837 -0.3283891 0.17632342 

Neutral -6 0.02996738 0.82019486 -0.2256746 0.28174814 

Fear -1.5  -0.1026927 0.43492694 -0.3475545 0.15528116 

Fear -3 -0.1950193 0.13538112 -0.4277612 0.06197439 

Fear -6 0.19830158 0.12879949 -0.0585725 0.43054667 

Scrambled -1.5  0.14811209 0.25873769 -0.1099477 0.38746451 

Scrambled -3 0.06748406 0.6084286 -0.1896912 0.31599393 

Scrambled -6 -0.1628074 0.2139105 -0.400188 0.09504661 

CompositeGradient 0.02323721 0.86011165 -0.2320567 0.27553611 

CI = 95% - Confidence Interval 

To complement the analyses focusing on trait anxiety, we examined the relationships between state anxiety, 

trait anxiety, and the composite gradient measure. Trait and state anxiety were not significantly correlated in 

the present sample (Pearson’s r = -0. 14, p = 0.292, 95% CI [-0.38, 0.12]). Likewise, state anxiety was not Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 47 

significantly associated with the composite gradient measure (Pearson’s r = -0.25, p = 0.052, 95% CI [-0.48, 

0.00]). 

Whole -Brain Morphometric Correlates of Trait Anxiety: 

Whole -brain m ultiple regression analyses with trait anxiety (STAI -Trait) as the sole predictor of regional 

GMV after controlling for age and total intracranial volume as well as cortical thickness after controlling for 

age. 

Main Result: No clusters survived family -wise error (FWE) correction .

Results A [Positive correlation between Trait Anxiety and GMV – gray matter volume] 

All peak -level T values ≤ 4.38 and all cluster -level FWE -corrected ps ≥ 0.860 

Result B [Negative correlation between Trait Anxiety and GMV – gray matter volume] 

All peak -level T values ≤ 4.55 and all cluster -level FWE -corrected ps ≥ 0.650 

Result C [Positive Correlation between Trait Anxiety and SBM – cortical thickness] 

No voxels survived height threshold. 

Result D [Negative Correlation between Tr ait Anxiety and SBM – cortical thickness] 

All peak -level T values ≤ 2.80 and all cluster -level FWE -corrected ps ≥ 0.886 Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 48 

Supplementary Fig. 1 

Supplementary Fig. 1 Effects of partial Emotion pre -cues on Attention gradient . Box and whisker plots 

showing the respective distributions and medians (red horizontal lines in the boxes) of the attention gradients 

pre -cued by three different partial emotions. Note that there was no statistically significant difference across 

the thr ee emotions. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 49 

Supplementary Fig. 2 

Supplementary Fig. 2. Distribution of signed Near –Far attention gradients across participants . The 

histogram shows the distribution of participant -level mean signed Near –Far gradients averaged across the 

three emotional conditions and used to derive the Euclidean norm composite metric . Positive values indicate 

relative prioritization of near (1.5°) compared to far (6°) locations, whereas negative values indicate relative 

prioritization of far compared to near locations. Although the Euclidean norm employed in the primary MRI 

analyses is direction -invariant, 75% of participants (45/60) exhibited positive signed gradients, indicating that 

near -space prioritization was the predominant attentional profile in the pr esent sample. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 50 

Supplementary Fig. 3

Supplementary Fig. 3 Relationship of GMV with Attention Gradient . (A) Negative correlation between 

attention gradient and GMV in bilateral cerebellar lobule VI in high anxiety subset males (red circles and 

broken trend line) and females (red triangles and solid trend line) (B) Negative correlation between attention 

gradient and GMV in bilateral cerebellar lobule VI in low anxiety subset males (blue circles and broken trend 

line) and females (blue triangles and solid trend line) Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 51 

Supplementary Fig. 4

Supplementary Fig. 4 Relationship of cortical thickness with Attention Gradient. Negative correlation 

between attention gradient and cortical thickness in the left ( precentral gyrus + paracentral lobule) in males 

(black circles and solid trend line) and females ( black squares and broken trend line) Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 52 

3. Supplementary Analysis 3 

To support the primary analyses, we conducted a series of additional reliability, validity, and sensitivity 

analyses. These analyses evaluated the stability of the visuospatial attention gradient measure, its convergence 

with an alternative three -eccentric ity slope -based metric, and the robustness of the reported neuroanatomical 

findings across two different methods of calculating the attentional gradients. 

3.1 Split -Half Reliability of the Composite Gradient Measure 

To evaluate the reliability of the composite Near –Far gradient as an individual -difference measure, the data 

were divided into two independent halves (first three sessions and last three sessions) and the Euclidean norm -

based gradient metric was computed separately for each half. Because split -half correlations are based on 

shortened versions of the measure, the resulting correlation was adjusted using the Spearman –Brown formula 

to estimate the reliability of the full -length measure (BROWN, 1910; SPEARMAN, 1910) . The split -half 

correlation was significant (Pearson’s r(58) = 0.56, 95% CI [0.35, 0.7 1], p < 0.001), and the corresponding 

Spearman –Brown corrected reliability coefficient was 0.7 1. The Spearman –Brown corrected reliability 

coefficient exceeded 0.70, meeting the generally accepted empirical threshold for adequate internal 

consistency or stabilit y of participant differences in the gradient measure (Hair et al. , 2019) .

3.2 Convergent Validity of the Near –Far Gradient Metric 

To determine whether the primary findings depended on the endpoint -based Near –Far gradie nt metric, we 

derived an alternative attentional gradient measure using all three eccentricities (1.5°, 3°, and 6°). For each 

participant and emotion condition, a simple linear regression was fitted to the nIES values across eccentricities. 

This was of the form: nIES = b0 + b1(Eccentricity) where b0 = intercept; b1 = slope coefficient. The resulting 

slope coefficient was extracted as an index of the rate of change in attentional efficiency (nIES) across space. 

The goodness -of -fit (R ²) of each participant -specific linear model was also computed to evaluate how well a 

linear gradient described the eccentricity profile. Analogous to the original analysis, the three emotion -specific 

slopes were combined using a Euclidean norm to generate a composit e slope -based gradient metric. We then 

examined the correspondence between this alternative metric and the original Near –Far composite gradient Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 53 

using Pearson’s correlations and 95% confidence intervals. Additional emotion -specific correlations were 

conduct ed to determine whether the endpoint -based Near –Far gradients and the corresponding three -point 

slope estimates captured similar individual differences in attentional deployment within each emotional 

condition (Neutral, Fear, Scrambled). Finally, summary s tatistics of the participant -specific R 2 were computed 

to characterize the overall quality of the linear fits. 

We observed a strong positive association between the two measures when combined across three 

emotion conditions, which was significant (Pearson ’s r(58) = 0.97, 95% CI [0.95, 0.98], p < 0.0001; 

Supplementary Figure 5), indicating that both approaches captured highly similar individual differences in 

visuospatial attentional gradients. Consistent results were observed at the level of individual emo tion 

conditions, where the endpoint -based gradients were significantly associated with their corresponding three -

point slope estimates (Neutral: Pearson’s r(58) = - 0.9927, 95% CI [ -0.9957, -0.9878], p < 0.0001; Fear: 

Pearson’s r(58) = - 0.9938, 95% CI [ -0.9963, -0.9896], p < 0.0001; Scrambled: Pearson’s r(58) = - 0.9911, 

95% CI [ -0.9947, -0.9851], p < 0.0001). Note that the negative correlations observed at the emotion -specific 

level reflect the opposite sign conventions of the endpoint gradient (Near m inus Far) and slope metrics, which 

capture the same underlying attentional profile in opposite directions. However, because the Euclidean norm 

removes directional information by squaring the emotion -specific values, these inverse relationships are 

transfor med into a strong positive association between the corresponding composite metrics. To further 

evaluate the suitability of the slope -based approach, we examined the quality of the participant -specific linear 

fits across the three eccentricities. The linear model accounted for an appreciable proportion of variance in the 

eccentricity profiles (mean R² = 0.66, 95% CI [0.61, 0.70]). 

Together, these findings provide evidence of convergent validity and suggest that the observed effects using 

the original Euclid ean norm based composite gradient used in the reported findings are not dependent on the 

specific Near – Far endpoint -based quantification of the attentional gradient. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 54 

Supplementary Figure 5 . Convergent validity of the Near – Far attentional gradient metric . Scatterplot 

showing the association between the original endpoint -based composite gradient (CompositeGradient) and the 

alternative three -eccentricity slope -based composite metric (SlopeNorm). The significant association between 

the two measures ind icates that individual differences in attentional gradients are not dependent on the choice 

of the specific method used to quantify them. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 55 

3.3 Sensitivity Analysis (Neuroimaging) Using a Three -Eccentricity Slope -Based Gradient Metric 

To determine whethe r the reported neuroanatomical findings depended on the endpoint -based Near –Far 

gradient metric, we repeated the principal VBM and SBM analyses using the alternative slope -based 

composite gradient derived from participant -specific linear slopes estimated a cross all three eccentricities. The 

resulting findings closely matched those obtained with the original gradient measure, indicating that the 

observed brain -behaviour relationships were robust to the method used to quantify the attentional gradient and 

wer e not driven by the specific choice of Near - Far endpoint -based method of gradient calculation. The same 

neuroanatomical regions identified using the original Near –Far gradient metric remained significant when the 

slope -based metric was used, although min or differences in cluster -forming thresholds were observed for the 

SBM analyses. The minor differences in SBM cluster -forming thresholds may be due to small differences in 

the variance captured by the alternative slope -based and endpoint -based gradient measures. Despite these 

quantitative differences, the same cortical regions were identified, indicating that the underlying 

neuroanatomical associations were robust to the method used to estimate the attentional gra dient . Please see 

Supplementary Table 2 for details. Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 56 

Supplementary Table 2. Sensitivity Analysis Using a Three -Eccentricity Slope -Based Gradient Metric 

Analysis Region Peak MNI 

(x,y,z) 

Peak T Cluster Size Cluster -

Forming 

Threshold 

FWE -

corrected p 

VBM: 

Main 

Effect –

Slope 

attention 

gradient 

Cerebellar 

Lobule VI 

33, -56, -28 5.41 14 p < 0.001 0.019 

SBM: 

Main 

Effect -

Slope 

attention 

gradient 

Front Inf Tri 

Left 

Left 

Precentral 

Gyrus 

-41, 22, 22 

-46, 0, 35 

3.92 528 p < 0.006 0.034 

VBM : 

Trait 

Anxiety × 

Slope 

attention 

gradient 

Right 

Cerebellum 

Lobule VI 

Left 

Cerebellum 

Lobule VI 

33, -57, -28 

-21, -60, -26 

5.32 

4.83 

1964 

871 

p < 0.001 

p < 0.001 

< 0.001 

0.022 

SBM: 

Trait 

Anxiety × 

Slope 

attention 

gradient 

Left 

Precentral 

Gyrus 

Left 

Paracentral 

Lobule 

Left 

Precentral 

Gyrus 

-23, -24, 66 

-13, -21, 72 

-38, -21, 61 

3.32 764 p < 0.01 0.016 Neuroanatomy of Attentional Narrowing 57 

References: 

BROWN, W. (1910) SOME EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS IN THE CORRELATION OF MENTAL 

ABILITIES. Br. J. Psychol. 1904‐1920 , 3.

Hair, J.F., Black, W.C., Babin, B.J., & Anderson, R.E. (2019) Multivariate Aata Analysis (8th Ed.). Cengage 

Learning. , Gedrag & Organisatie. 

SPEARMAN, C. (1910) CORRELATION CALCULATED FROM FAULTY DATA. Br. J. Psychol. 1904‐ 

1920 , 3.