Title: 2025.findings-acl.475.pdf

URL Source: https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-acl.475.pdf

Published Time: Wed, 16 Jul 2025 13:58:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
> Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 , pages 9122–9137 July 27 - August 1, 2025 ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics

# Debate, Reflect, and Distill: Multi-Agent Feedback with Tree-Structured Preference Optimization for Efficient Language Model Enhancement 

Xiaofeng Zhou 1*, Heyan Huang 1, Lizi Liao 2

> 1

Beijing Institute of Technology, 2Singapore Management University 

{zhouxiaofeng, hhy63}@bit.edu.cn, lzliao@smu.edu.sg 

Abstract 

Large Language Models (LLMs) continue to set new standards in knowledge-intensive and complex reasoning tasks, yet their high com-putational demands limit widespread adop-tion. While distilling large models into smaller ones offers a sustainable solution, current techniques—such as static knowledge distil-lation, resource-intensive reinforcement learn-ing from human feedback, or limited self-reflection—struggle to yield substantial and lasting performance gains. In this paper, we present a novel Debate and Reflect ( D&R )framework that orchestrates multi-turn debates between smaller models and stronger teacher models, eliciting actionable feedback ( e.g. , er-ror analysis, corrective strategies) to guide student models. Further, we introduce Tree-structured Direct Preference Optimization (T-DPO) to efficiently leverage these debate logs, organizing interactions into a hierarchical for-mat for effective training. Empirical evalua-tions across diverse NLP benchmarks demon-strate that our approach significantly improves smaller-model accuracy, robustness, and gener-alization, outperforming conventional baselines by a large margin. 

1 Introduction 

LLMs have emerged as powerful tools for tackling complex reasoning tasks (Zelikman et al., 2024; Qwen et al., 2025; He et al., 2024). Their ability to process and generate coherent, context-aware outputs has set a new standard in artificial intelli-gence (AI). However, the computational demands of training and deploying these models make them inaccessible to many users, highlighting the need for more efficient alternatives. Developing smaller models capable of achieving similar knowledge and reasoning performance is an essential step toward making advanced AI technologies more accessible and sustainable.      

> *This work was done during an internship at SMU. Distillation
> Teacher Models
> Student Model Debate
> Distilled Models
> ✓✕
> MAG Preference
> Tree
> ✓✕
> Response
> Self -Reflection
> Teacher Feedback
> ✓✕

Figure 1: Overview of D&R. The student model de-bates with teacher models, receiving self-reflection and teacher feedback. A Multi-Agent Interaction Graph (MAG) records debate content, from which preference trees are extracted. All information is then distilled into the student, enhancing its knowledge and reasoning. 

Existing strategies for enhancing smaller models generally fall into three categories. First, knowl-edge distillation transfers knowledge from a larger teacher to a smaller student model (Hinton et al., 2015; Shridhar et al., 2023). While effective for reducing model size, traditional distillation pro-cedures are typically one-off processes that lack targeted guidance from the teacher. That is, the teacher’s rich insights into how the student can improve are not fully leveraged, and the student of-ten receives only generic training signals. Second, 

reinforcement learning from human feedback 

(RLHF) aligns model behavior with human pref-erences and can substantially boost reasoning (Sti-ennon et al., 2020; Liang et al., 2024c). However, it requires extensive human intervention, raising concerns about scalability and cost. Third, multi-agent systems and self-reflection frameworks en-able models to exchange critiques or engage in introspective refinement during inference (Liang et al., 2024b; Madaan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024a). Although these methods show promise in improving model reasoning, they often apply feedback only transiently—without permanently 

9122 updating model weights—or use simplistic fine-tuning schemes that do not fully exploit iterative feedback. In this paper, we introduce a novel Debate and Reflect ( D&R ) framework that combines the strengths of multi-agent debate and actionable teacher feedback to robustly enhance smaller mod-els. Concretely, a student model engages in multi-turn debates with one or more stronger teacher models, collecting detailed feedback in the form of error analyses, corrective strategies, and best practices. Crucially, the feedback is not limited to a single inference; rather, we incorporate both 

self-reflection and teacher feedback mechanisms that help the student to internalize these insights for lasting, parameter-level improvements (Yuan et al., 2024; Ying et al., 2024; Lan et al., 2024). To maximize the efficiency of this training signal, we further propose Tree-structured Direct Prefer-ence Optimization (T-DPO) to transform debate logs into hierarchical preference trees (Yuan et al., 2025). By systematically organizing intermediate debate turns and teacher guidance, T-DPO enables the student to learn not just what the best response is, but why certain answers are preferred. Through extensive empirical evaluations, we show that D&R with T-DPO significantly outperforms conventional methods in accuracy, robustness, and generaliza-tion, offering a promising route for achieving high performance in smaller, more accessible language models. In summary, our contributions are threefold: • We introduce a Debate and Reflect paradigm that combines the strengths of multi-agent in-teraction and targeted teacher feedback to con-tinuously improve smaller models. • We propose a Tree-structured Direct Prefer-ence Optimization (T-DPO) to better lever-ages debate data by structuring it into prefer-ence trees for efficient and robust training. • Extensive experiments across diverse NLP tasks, demonstrating that our method signifi-cantly outperforms standard knowledge distil-lation and supervised fine-tuning. 

2 Related Work 

2.1 Knowledge Distillation 

Knowledge distillation (Hinton et al., 2015) is a widely used technique for transferring knowledge from large and high-performing teacher models to smaller student models, enhancing performance while reducing inference costs. Given the varying parameter sizes, capabilities, and computational requirements of LLMs (Touvron et al., 2023; Jiang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2023; Ren et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2024; Bai et al., 2024), distilling knowledge from powerful teacher models is a common strategy for optimizing the trade-off between performance and efficiency. Typically, knowledge distillation in-volves querying teacher models with a set of seed data to extract relevant knowledge, which is then used to train student models through various distil-lation algorithms (Xu et al., 2024; Gu et al., 2024). In the context of reasoning tasks, Chain of Thought (CoT) reasoning serves as a crucial learning signal, allowing student models to learn structured rea-soning steps from their teachers (Mukherjee et al., 2023). Beyond CoT, feedback has also been em-ployed to provide process supervision, further re-fining student models’ reasoning capabilities (Luo et al., 2023). However, conventional knowledge distillation methods are typically static, meaning they lack iterative interactions between teacher and student models. To address this, our work utilizes CoT and feedback from debate-based interactions, providing more targeted and dynamic guidance for student model improvement. 

2.2 Multi-Agent Debate 

Multi-agent debate refines LLM reasoning and decision-making based on LLMs’ powerful con-versational ability (Chu et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024a; Yang et al., 2024) and agents’ collaborative ability (Li et al., 2023; Tu et al., 2024), by ex-ploring diverse reasoning paths and cross-verifying claims, thereby reducing hallucinations and errors (Du et al., 2024). It also serves as an evaluation mechanism for tasks like question answering and summarization (Chan et al., 2024). Debate formats vary—from collaborative (Xiong et al., 2023) to adversarial (Cohen et al., 2023)—with different communication protocols (Chan et al., 2024). Re-cent studies show that such frameworks can even drive self-improvement without human supervision (Fu et al., 2023). For instance, MAGD I (Chen et al., 2024) uses multi-teacher debates to build interaction graphs that yield richer learning signals than single-teacher setups. In our work, we lever-age multi-agent debates with stronger models to generate richer reasoning and actionable feedback, 9123 Debate MAG with the student model  Preference Tree   

> ✓✕
> ✓✕
> Question: An object of height 5cm is placed 10 cm in front of a convex mirror that
> has a radius of curvature of 45.0 cm. Determine the magnification of the image.
> (Gold answer is 1.8)

Round  ⋯

1

2

3                      

> ✓R: The focal length of a convex
> is given by f = R/2 where R is the
> radius .... The magnification is
> given by ... M = 1.8 ✓R: The focal length of a convex
> mirror is half its radius of
> curvature... 1/22.5 = 1/10 + 1/di
> Magnification is ... 1.8
> ✕R: ... \[ m = -1.8 \]
> SR: The error in the response lies
> in the calculation ...
> TF: ...assigned a negative value ... ✓R: To find the magnification ...
> Determine the focal length... Apply
> the mirror formula ... The correct
> magnification is 1.8 ✓R: Calculate the focal length...
> Use the mirror formula...
> Solve for the image distance...
> The correct magnification is 1.8
> ✕R: ... the answer is 1.0
> SR: The incorrect answer was ...
> TF: Your final answer is incorrect.
> Your reasoning about... ✓R: The given problem involves
> ... To find magnification...use the
> mirror formula... we have m = -
> (-18)/10 = 1.8.

⋯

⋯

⋯          

> ✓R: Using the mirror equation
> ...Solving for di 1/di =1/22.5 -
> 1/10... The magnification is M= -
> di/do = -(-18)/10=1.8
> ✕R: ... magnification is 0.833 ...
> SR: ...a calculation error
> in finding the image distance ...
> TF: ... mistake when calculating...
> Question: An object of height 5cm is ...

Structured Information              

> ✓R: The focal length of a convex is
> given by f = R/2 where R is the .... The
> magnification is given by ... M = 1.8
> ✕R: ... \[ m = -1.8 \]
> SR: The error in the response lies in ...
> TF: ... assigned a negative value ...
> ⋯
> ✕R: ... Therefore, the answer is 1.0
> SR: The incorrect answer was ...
> TF: Your final answer is incorrect ...
> ... M=-di/do=
> -(-18)/10=1.8

✓ ... magnification 

> is 0.833 ...

✕Figure 2: A debate example of our proposed D&R. The left part demonstrates the MAG of a debate involving the teacher models T1, T 2, · · · and the student model S. Each node corresponds to an agent in a round, including responses (R), self-reflection (SR), and teacher feedback (TF). The highlighted nodes are extracted to construct a preference tree for T-DPO. In its root node, there is the structured information representing the previous debate. 

integrating these insights into our Tree-structured Direct Preference Optimization pipeline. 

2.3 DPO and Reasoning 

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) (Rafailov et al., 2023) offers a stable and computationally ef-ficient way to align LLMs with specific objectives, making it valuable for refining both behavior and reasoning quality. Several extensions illustrate how DPO can be harnessed to improve reasoning. For instance, RPO (Pang et al., 2024) iteratively ap-plies DPO alongside negative log-likelihood losses to fine-tune models on complex tasks. CPO (Zhang et al., 2024a) and Eurus (Yuan et al., 2025) take a tree-structured approach, building hierarchical rea-soning paths to guide DPO-based alignment. Fur-ther refinements like Step-DPO (Lai et al., 2024) and Step-Controlled DPO (Lu et al., 2024) apply alignment at each individual reasoning step, en-suring that the model learns correct transitions be-tween steps. In addition, M-DPO (Xiong et al., 2025) shows how DPO can be extended to multi-turn dialogues, incorporating tool usage for solving math problems. In our work, we extend DPO with a Tree-structured approach (T-DPO) that turns debate logs into hierarchical preference trees, enabling the student model to learn from both final answers and the intermediate reasoning in multi-turn debates. 

3 Debate & Reflect Method 

To improve small models using Debate & Reflect (D&R ), we construct debates where the small student model engages in discussions with their teacher models, receiving feedback from them (Sec-tion 3.1). From debates, we construct preference trees in Multi-Agent Interaction Graphs (MAGs) including debate context for T-DPO (Section 3.2). Finally, we distill these structured insights into the student model with T-DPO, enabling more effective learning (Section 3.3). 

3.1 Small Models Engage in Debates 

To enable iterative interaction and targeted feed-back, we design a debate framework where a stu-dent model engages in discussions with stronger teacher models. Figure 2 shows a debate exam-ple. We use training sets as our data sources to obtain gold answers. During the debates, multiple agents engage in several rounds of discussion on the same problem, exchanging their insights, and ultimately achieving a consensus answer. In each debate round, the teacher models T = {Ti}ni=1 and the student model S analyze the structured infor-mation from the previous debate round. This infor-mation includes prior responses, along with the cor-responding self-reflection and feedback. Based on this analysis, each agent generates a new response that includes both a reasoning process and a final answer. To evaluate performance, we compare each agent’s response against the gold answer. Agents who get an incorrect answer (such as the student model S) are prompted to self-reflect, while agents with correct answers (such as a teacher model Ti)provide constructive feedback to incorrect agents. Teacher models actively highlight student errors and suggest corrections, while the student model attempts to recognize and address its own mistakes. Then the newly generated responses, including rea-soning processes, self-reflections, and feedback, are passed to the next round as updated structured information. In the next round, the models also analyze the strengths and weaknesses of their pre-9124 vious responses again, identifying potential errors and incorporating corrective feedback to generate next-round responses. This iterative process en-ables the student model to progressively refine its reasoning and responses. Debates continue until all agents reach a consensus or the maximum number of rounds is reached. Following Chen et al. (2024), we construct MAGs for debates, which record de-bate processes as structured graphs for distillation. 

3.2 Construct Preference Trees for T-DPO 

To effectively train models on reasoning trajecto-ries, we construct preference trees as structured representations of debate interactions. Inspired by previous studies (Yuan et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024a), we propose Tree-structured DPO (T-DPO) for debate distillation, which constructs preference trees from graphs for preference optimization. The right hand side of Figure 2 shows an exam-ple of our preference tree. Preference trees capture small, specific reasoning cases from debates. In the debates mentioned above, agents receive structured information from the previous round and generate new responses. Each agent is given the same input prompt in the same round, containing the problem and the previous structured information. However, due to varying capabilities, agents produce differ-ent responses; some are correct, and others are incorrect. Therefore, we choose an input prompt as the root node of a preference tree. A correct re-sponse and an incorrect response derived from this prompt become child nodes. The root node stores not only the previous round’s responses but also self-reflection and feedback on the incorrect an-swers. This allows agents to integrate insights from past correct responses while addressing mistakes through refinement. Responses that evolve into cor-rect answers (chosen nodes) illustrate how effective reasoning develops over multiple debate rounds. Conversely, responses that remain incorrect (re-jected nodes) highlight lessons that should not be reinforced in the distillation process. Through this hierarchical structure, preference trees systemati-cally map out reasoning trajectories, helping mod-els internalize both successful strategies and critical learning points from past errors. 

3.3 Distillation 

Our distillation pipeline consists of two key stages: Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) and Tree-structured DPO (T-DPO). First, we extract problems and their corresponding correct responses from MAGs to construct the SFT dataset. Each data instance in this dataset includes an instruction I, a problem xi,and its correct answer yi, but excludes the struc-tured information from the previous debate round. The student model is optimized with maximum likelihood estimation: 

LSF T = −E(I,x,y )∼D SF T log πθ(y|I, x ),

where DSF T is the SFT training dataset and the student model πθ is initialized as the original small model before distillation. In the second stage, we apply T-DPO training to refine the student model’s reasoning. The root node of each preference tree serves as the input prompt, incorporating the instruction I, the prob-lem x, and the previous structured information SI .The correct and incorrect child nodes act as the cho-sen and rejected responses, yw and yl, respectively. The student model is optimized with the T-DPO objective: 

LT −DP O = − E(I,x,SI,y w ,y l)∼D T −DP O 

[

log σ

(

β log πθ(yw|I, x, SI )

πref (yw|I, x, SI )

−β log πθ(yl|I, x, SI )

πref (yl|I, x, SI )

)] 

,

where DT −DP O is all preference trees in the T-DPO training dataset, σ is the logistic function, πθ

is the student model policy, πref is the base refer-ence policy, and β is the hyperparameter control-ling the deviation from the base reference policy. Both πθ and πref are initialized with the above SFT-trained student model. After undergoing SFT and T-DPO, the student model acquires the ability to construct correct rea-soning paths while effectively avoiding past errors. During inference, the model processes problems step by step, systematically generating thoughts and analyses, ultimately leading to final answers. 

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Settings 

This section outlines the major settings. More set-ting details in Appendix A. 

Datasets. The MMLU Pro benchmark (Wang et al., 2024b) is a multi-discipline language un-derstanding and reasoning benchmark, extending the MMLU benchmark (Hendrycks et al., 2021a) with more challenging problems. The dataset is 9125 partially derived from MMLU, with additional sam-ples sourced from the Internet and other datasets. It not only evaluates the models’ knowledge but also emphasizes reasoning capabilities. Notably, it expands the number of answer choices to 10. For our experiments, we choose three categories of MMLU Pro: computer science, physics, and biology. These categories vary in data size and complexity, making them ideal for evaluating both knowledge retention and logical reasoning. Since MMLU Pro does not provide a dedicated training set, we split the original test set into separate train-ing and test sets. Statistical information of datasets is shown in Table 5. The MATH dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021b) is a benchmark designed to assess step-by-step math-ematical reasoning in LLMs. It requires LLMs to think about the problems step by step and generate a final answer, such as a mathematical expression. In our experiments, we adopt the training data in Chen et al. (2024) but reconstruct the debates and MAGs with our teacher and student models. 

Baselines. To evaluate our method, we compare it against various distillation baselines. (1) No Dis-tillation : the original Mistral-7B-Instruct model without any distillation. For MMLU Pro, it is tested in a zero-shot setting. For MATH, we provide only a few simple demonstrations from (Hendrycks et al., 2021b) to illustrate the expected output for-mat. (2) Single-Teacher Distillation : The student model is distilled using SFT with knowledge from only one teacher model at a time. (3) Multi-Teacher Distillation : MAGD I (Chen et al., 2024) uses both correct and incorrect answers of multiple teacher models for distillation. But it does not involve the student interacting with teachers and lacks reflec-tion or feedback mechanisms. Following the offi-cial code of MAGD I, we reimplement it with our debate data. For all baseline models and D&R, We select GPT-4o 1, Claude 3.5 2, and Gemini 1.5 Pro 3

as our teacher models, while the student model is Mistral-7B-Instruct (Jiang et al., 2023). 

Evaluation Metrics. For MMLU Pro, we use accuracy as the evaluation metric. For MATH, we follow Hendrycks et al. (2021b) to use exact match after normalizing answers to get accuracy. 

> 1https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o
> 2https://www.anthropic.com/claude/sonnet
> 3https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/models/ gemini

Implement Details. To ensure high-quality dis-tillation while controlling computational costs, we impose the following settings. 4 When constructing debates, we limit debates to a maximum of 4 rounds to balance cost-efficiency and data richness. When collecting root node data for preference trees, we control the length of structured information since it is impractical to train the student model with too long sequences. We aim to include as much structured information in root nodes as possible and place the remainder into a new preference tree. For the first round, the preference trees have no structured information from the previous round. During distillation, we implement our distillation with LoRA (Hu et al., 2022). The prompt templates used in our experiments are shown in Appendix F. 

4.2 Main Results. 

We show our experiment results in Table 1. The student model’s knowledge and reasoning capa-bility across three disciplines, computer science, physics, and biology, are evaluated by MMLU Pro. The complex mathematic reasoning capability is evaluated by MATH. 

D&R significantly enhances the student model through distillation. Before distillation, the orig-inal Mistral-7B-Instruct demonstrates moderate performance. On MMLU Pro, it surpasses the ran-dom guessing performance (10.00) by a meaningful margin, highlighting its basic knowledge and rea-soning capability. However, on MATH, it achieves only 8.02, indicating that it can handle complex reasoning for only a small subset of MATH prob-lems. All distillation methods lead to notable im-provements over the original Mistral-7B-Instruct. D&R gets an average improvement of 14.18 (up to 18.41 in the biology category of MMLU Pro). This strong improvement underscores D&R’s abil-ity to capture the valuable insights of debates and recognize the preference between the correct and incorrect answers. 

D&R outperforms Single-Teacher Distillation. 

As baseline models, single-teacher distillation re-sults vary across different teacher models. Among them, Single Teacher Claude 3.5 achieves the best average results of single-teacher distillation, while Single Teacher Gemini 1.5 P ro lags behind, with an average performance gap of 3.38. Despite these variations, all single-teacher distillation methods      

> 4We release our code in https://github.com/ zhouxiaofengshelf/D-R .

9126 Models MMLU Pro MATH Average Computer Science (CS) Physics Biology                                        

> No Distillation
> Mistral-7B-Instruct 20.49 18.46 48.95 8.02 23.98
> Single-Teacher Distillation
> Single Teacher GP T −4o27.80 28.63 62.34 16.92 33.92 Single Teacher Claude 3.530.73 30.77 62.76 16.56 35.21 Single Teacher Gemini 1.5P ro 25.85 24.92 60.67 15.86 31.83
> Multi-Teaher Distillation
> MAGD I22.93 20.00 54.39 11.26 27.15 D&R SF T 32.68 29.23 64.44 17.64 36.00 D&R 33.17 34.77 67.36 17.32 38.16

Table 1: The main results of our experiments on three categories of MMLU Pro and MATH. We compare our D&R with three types of distillation baselines and SFT-only D&R SF T . MAGD I are reimplemented with its official code and our debate data. Bold figures denote the best results. 

lead to meaningful improvements, proving that knowledge and reasoning can be effectively trans-ferred from teacher models. Compared to the single-teacher distillation, D&R achieves better distillation results. On the average performance, D&R improves at least 2.95 (from 35.21 of Single Teacher Claude 3.5 to 38.16 of D&R). The key advantages of D&R include multiple teacher models for richer insights, debate mechanisms for iterative interactions, and T-DPO for structured reasoning preference learning. These factors collectively enable more effective knowl-edge and reasoning acquisition. The debate pro-cess enhances training data quality, focusing on the student model’s weaknesses, while T-DPO re-fines learning by emphasizing the contrast between correct and incorrect responses. 

D&R achieves the best performance in Multi-Teacher Distillation. D&R SF T already achieves strong performance, surpassing most baseline mod-els. T-DPO further enhances it, leading to an additional 2.16 improvement in the average per-formance. On the MATH dataset, the result of D&R is slightly lower than the one of D&R SF T 

but still higher than all other baseline models. We will conduct further exploration in Section 4.3.4. Compared to MAGD I, our D&R demonstrates a substantial average gain of 11.01 (up to 14.77 in the physics category of MMLU Pro). While both D&R and MAGD I utilize multiple teachers and debates, D&R generates richer debate content. In-volving the student model in the debates can lead to higher-quality training data. The teacher models are aware of errors in the student model and can ac-tively provide explicit feedback. The student model 30 40 50 60 70 80 

> Performance
> 0.000
> 0.001
> 0.002
> Efficiency
> Mistral
> MAGDi
> ST Claude
> D&R
> Debate

Figure 3: Trade-off between performance and efficiency. Inspired by Chen et al. (2024), we define efficiency as 1/avg (tokens ). D&R improves both performance and efficiency compared to previous distillation meth-ods, surpassing their Pareto frontier. We choose Single Teacher Claude 3.5 (ST Claude ) to represent the Single-Teacher Distillation. 

learns not only from teacher responses but also from the feedback and their own self-reflection to know where and why it makes errors. This process makes D&R’s distillation approach superior to pas-sively learning from teacher responses without ex-plicit error analysis, as done in MAGD I. Moreover, T-DPO provides a more structured and effective optimization framework than the margin-based ob-jective (Cortes and Vapnik, 1995) and GCN (Kipf and Welling, 2017) of MAGD I. MAGD I underper-forms compared to the single-teacher distillation, suggesting its joint learning of three training objec-tives may not model the debate data effectively. 

4.3 Detailed Analysis 4.3.1 D&R Improves Inference Efficiency 

D&R effectively balance efficiency and perfor-mance. Although LLMs and debate can provide 9127 Models Additional Correction Accuracy D&R None 34.77 D&R Self-Reflect       

> 36.92
> without SR data 33.85 (-3.07) without TF data 32.31 (-4.61) without SR & TF data 31.38 (-5.54) D&R Teacher ∗
> Feedback
> 37.54
> without SR data 32.62 (-4.92) without TF data 32.00 (-5.54) without SR & TF data 31.08 (-6.46)
> * As during inference, we do not allow teacher models to involve, we let the student model role-play a teacher.

Table 2: Effect of self-reflection (SR) and teacher feed-back (TF) in D&R. We also show D&R with additional self-reflection and teacher feedback during inference. 

strong knowledge and reasoning, they come at a high inference cost. Distillation improves effi-ciency, making reasoning models more accessible and sustainable. Inspired by Chen et al. (2024), we measure inference efficiency by calculating to-ken cost per problem across three categories in MMLU Pro (excluding MATH due to API cost). We report our detailed token cost in Appendix C. Figure 3 illustrates the trade-off between perfor-mance and efficiency. Debate incurs the highest token cost, making it the least efficient. After distil-lation, MAGD I and Single Teacher Claude 3.5 can generate better reasoning paths, improving their performance with high efficiency. D&R surpasses the boundaries of previous distillation methods, not only improving performance but also effectively enhancing efficiency. It becomes a new optimal balance of performance and inference efficiency. 

4.3.2 D&R Can Correct Itself 

D&R not only improves reasoning but also learns to identify and correct its own mistakes. In our debates, agents are explicitly required to generate self-reflection and feedback to identify and correct errors. During distillation, the student model learns this correction process. To evaluate its error cor-rection ability, we conduct an additional correction step during inference. In correspondence with the self-reflection and feedback in the training debates, we design two additional correction methods. The first one is self-reflection. After generating an ini-tial response, the student model self-reflects on its own response and updates its answer. The second one is teacher feedback simulation. The student model roleplays a teacher model, critiques its own response as if reviewing another agent’s answer, and then corrects errors (both the teacher and stu-200 400 600 800 1000 

> # Training Debates
> 17.5
> 20.0
> 22.5
> 25.0
> 27.5
> 30.0
> 32.5
> 35.0
> Test Accuracy
> D&R
> D&R SFT
> D&R w/o SR&TF
> MAGDi
> No Distillation

Figure 4: Performance with different training debates on MMLU Pro physics. The dashed line refers to the original Mistral-7B-Instruct without any distillation. 

dent models are actually the same model). Table 2 shows how self-reflection and teacher feedback in training debates improve the student model’s per-formance. With these additional correction meth-ods, D&R can leverage its learned error correction ability to refine its reasoning. However, without the self-reflection and feedback data from the train-ing debates for distillation, the student model fails to effectively self-correct or simulate teacher feed-back during inference. This highlights that beyond reasoning, self-reflection and teacher feedback in training debates are essential for transferring criti-cal correction abilities to the student model, enhanc-ing its performance through additional correction at inference. 

4.3.3 D&R Works on Various Data Scales 

To further investigate D&R’s adaptability to dif-ferent training data size, we train D&R on the physics category of MMLU Pro using different debate scales: 100, 300, 600, and 974 debates (full set). The results, reported in Figure 4, reveal the following key findings. At first, our D&R achieves effective distillation learning across all dataset sizes, while MAGD I

struggles with smaller datasets and fails to distill knowledge and reasoning capabilities effectively. Then D&R outperforms MAGD I with all data scales. And T-DPO always enhances the SFT mod-els, proving that self-reflection and teacher feed-back in T-DPO are crucial. Without them, perfor-mance declines. The performance of D&R also improves as the data scale increases. Therefore, D&R has better utilization of debate data and still can capture preference with limited data. It can collect multiple SFT data instances and preference trees from a single debate MAG, improving data efficiency. The structured information in our pref-9128 Distillation Data Student Models MATH The Same Training Debates for D&R Mistral-7B-Instruct 8.02 with D&R SF T 17.64 (+9.62) with D&R 17.32 (+9.30) Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 45.78 with D&R SF T 47.06 (+1.28) with D&R 48.02 (+2.24) 

> Table 3: Comparison between different student models. The performance of distillation can be affected by the capability of student models. Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct is able to learn more during D&R distillation.

erence trees provides rich knowledge, while self-reflection and feedback data can help the student model deeply understand complex reasoning pref-erences. Hence D&R can be applied in scenarios with limited data resources, achieving effective im-provements with only a small number of debates. When given access to more data, it scales effec-tively, leading to further performance gains. 

4.3.4 D&R with Different Student Models 

D&R achieves improvements across student mod-els of varying capabilities. The effectiveness of distillation depends not only on teacher models and algorithms but also on the capability of our student model. MATH is a challenging dataset that requires complex reasoning. And the basic performance of Mistral-7B-Instruct on MATH is a little weak. As shown in Table 1, while D&R SF T 

achieves a strong distillation performance on the MATH dataset, D&R does not provide further im-provements. To investigate whether this limitation stems from the student model’s capacity, we dis-till the same training debates into a more powerful student model, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct. The results, presented in Table 3, confirm this hypothesis. On the MATH dataset, where Mistral may reaches a distillation bottleneck, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct con-tinues to improve with both SFT and T-DPO in D&R. The complex reasoning capacity of Mistral-7B-Instruct might not be sufficient for full distil-lation. It can absorb teacher models’ reasoning capabilities during SFT but reaches its capacity limit, preventing further gains from T-DPO. On the contrary, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct is stronger and has a much better basic MATH performance than Mistral-7B-Instruct. It has much potential for dis-tillation. Therefore, during the T-DPO, it can still learn more complex reasoning capabilities from our training debates, demonstrating that D&R can work well on the MATH dataset and fit different student                         

> Variants MMLU Pro MATH Avg. CS Phys. Biol.
> w/ SFT 32.68 29.23 64.44 17.64 36.00
> w/ RPO 36.59 32.00 66.95 17.00 38.14
> w/ T-DPO 33.17 34.77 67.36 17.32 38.16
> Table 4: Comparison among D&R variants. Although
> w/ RPO is better than w/ SFT , it generally performs worse than w/ T-DPO version.

models. That proves D&R’s robust effectiveness across diverse student models. 

4.3.5 The Influence of Different Objectives 

Our proposed T-DPO objective is well-suited for distilling reasoning abilities from debates. In rea-soning tasks, various preference-learning objec-tives exist (Xiong et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024a). In this section, we investigate whether T-DPO is sufficient and if other training objectives could re-place T-DPO in D&R. RPO (Pang et al., 2024) is a DPO-based training objective designed for reason-ing tasks. Previous experiments (Pang et al., 2024) suggest that the sequence-level log probabilities for chosen completions with RPO are increasing, while the standard DPO suffers a decrease. To compare these objectives, we apply RPO to our preference trees and report the results in Table 4. Following Pang et al. (2024), we set the hyper-parameter α in the RPO loss as 1. We observe that D&R RP O performs better than D&R SF T and close to D&R T −DP O in average performance. However, according to our experimental logs, the log proba-bility does not show a consistent trend across dif-ferent data categories. In some categories, such as physics, RPO increases log probabilities beyond T-DPO, yet performance does not improve. In others like computer science, log probabilities show little difference from T-DPO, yet RPO performs well. There is no clear correlation between log probabil-ity trends and model performance, suggesting that RPO’s effectiveness may be task-dependent. In conclusion, based on preference trees from debate graphs, T-DPO remains the most suitable objective for debate distillation. 

5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we proposed D&R, a novel distilla-tion framework to enhance small models through debates. The debate process, involving teacher and student models, fully exposed the student model’s weaknesses, providing self-reflection and feedback. Then, we used T-DPO with preference trees from 9129 debate MAGs, capturing structured information and preference relationships between different rea-soning paths. D&R effectively distilled the teacher models’ knowledge and reasoning capabilities into the student model through SFT and T-DPO. Our ex-periments demonstrate that D&R achieves superior distillation compared to baseline methods, bridg-ing the gap between smaller student models and larger teacher models. Compared to online debate everytime, D&R significantly improved inference efficiency. Beyond reasoning, it also strengthened the student model’s ability to self-correct. In future, we will explore long-term learning where the stu-dent model continues to improve over time through continuous debates and iterative feedback. 

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the National Re-search Foundation, Singapore under its National Large Language Models Funding Initiative (AISG Award No: AISG-NMLP-2024-002). Any opin-ions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of National Research Foundation, Singapore. It was also supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U21B2009) and the Lee Kong Chian Fellow-ship. This work was done during a visit to Singa-pore Management University funded by the China Scholarship Council. 

Limitations 

Our study has limitations in two aspects. First, while multi-agent debate and preference learning are explored across a wide range of tasks, such as evaluation and model alignment, our work focuses solely on the knowledge and reasoning tasks. In-vestigating D&R in other tasks would be valuable for assessing its generalizability. Second, our eval-uation primarily measures the correctness of final answers rather than the validity of reasoning paths, which may lead to some false positive results. Pro-cess verification remains an open challenge, and we anticipate future studies that incorporate com-prehensive evaluations of both reasoning paths and final outcomes. 

References 

Yu Bai, Xiyuan Zou, Heyan Huang, Sanxing Chen, Marc-Antoine Rondeau, Yang Gao, and Jackie CK Cheung. 2024. CItruS: Chunked Instruction-aware State Eviction for Long Sequence Modeling. In Pro-ceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Meth-ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5908– 5930, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan Liu. 2024. ChatEval: Towards Better LLM-based Eval-uators through Multi-Agent Debate. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Justin Chen, Swarnadeep Saha, Elias Stengel-Eskin, and Mohit Bansal. 2024. MAGDi: Structured Distillation of Multi-Agent Interaction Graphs Improves Reason-ing in Smaller Language Models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learn-ing , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 7220–7235. PMLR. Yuqi Chu, Lizi Liao, Zhiyuan Zhou, Chong-Wah Ngo, and Richang Hong. 2024. Towards Multimodal Emo-tional Support Conversation Systems. arXiv preprint .Roi Cohen, May Hamri, Mor Geva, and Amir Glober-son. 2023. LM vs LM: Detecting Factual Errors via Cross Examination. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 12621–12640, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics. Corinna Cortes and Vladimir Vapnik. 1995. Support-vector networks. Machine Learning , 20(3):273–297. Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. 2024. Improv-ing Factuality and Reasoning in Language Models through Multiagent Debate. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning ,volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 11733–11763. PMLR. Yao Fu, Hao Peng, Tushar Khot, and Mirella Lapata. 2023. Improving Language Model Negotiation with Self-Play and In-Context Learning from AI Feedback. 

arXiv preprint .Yuxian Gu, Li Dong, Furu Wei, and Minlie Huang. 2024. MiniLLM: Knowledge Distillation of Large Language Models. In The Twelfth International Con-ference on Learning Representations .Tao He, Lizi Liao, Yixin Cao, Yuanxing Liu, Ming Liu, Zerui Chen, and Bing Qin. 2024. Planning Like Hu-man: A Dual-process Framework for Dialogue Plan-ning. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 4768–4791, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021a. Measuring Massive Multitask Language Un-derstanding. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations .9130 Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Saurav Kadavath, Akul Arora, Steven Basart, Eric Tang, Dawn Song, and Jacob Steinhardt. 2021b. Measuring Mathematical Problem Solving With the MATH Dataset. In Pro-ceedings of the Neural Information Processing Sys-tems Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , volume 1. Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. 2015. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network. 

CoRR , abs/1503.02531. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-Rank Adaptation of Large Language Models. In The Tenth Inter-national Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2022, Virtual Event, April 25-29, 2022 . Open-Review.net. Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7B. arXiv preprint .Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. 2017. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Senqiao Yang, Xiangru Peng, and Jiaya Jia. 2024. Step-DPO: Step-wise Preference Optimization for Long-chain Rea-soning of LLMs. arXiv preprint .Tian Lan, Wenwei Zhang, Chengqi Lyu, Shuaibin Li, Chen Xu, Heyan Huang, Dahua Lin, Xian-Ling Mao, and Kai Chen. 2024. Training Language Models to Critique With Multi-agent Feedback. arXiv preprint .Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. 2023. CAMEL: Communicative Agents for "Mind" Exploration of Large Language Model Society. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 51991–52008. Curran Associates, Inc. Jiawei Li, Yizhe Yang, Yu Bai, Xiaofeng Zhou, Yinghao Li, Huashan Sun, Yuhang Liu, Xingpeng Si, Yuhao Ye, Yixiao Wu, Yiguan Lin, Bin Xu, Ren Bowen, Chong Feng, Yang Gao, and Heyan Huang. 2024. Fundamental Capabilities of Large Language Models and their Applications in Domain Scenarios: A Sur-vey. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 11116–11141, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics. Jinggui Liang, Yuxia Wu, Yuan Fang, Hao Fei, and Lizi Liao. 2024a. A Survey of Ontology Expansion for Conversational Understanding. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 18111–18127, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Tian Liang, Zhiwei He, Wenxiang Jiao, Xing Wang, Yan Wang, Rui Wang, Yujiu Yang, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2024b. Encouraging Divergent Think-ing in Large Language Models through Multi-Agent Debate. In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 17889–17904, Miami, Florida, USA. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Xinyue Liang, Jiawei Li, Yizhe Yang, and Yang Gao. 2024c. Bit_numeval at SemEval-2024 Task 7: En-hance Numerical Sensitivity and Reasoning Com-pleteness for Quantitative Understanding. In Pro-ceedings of the 18th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2024) , pages 1830– 1841, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Compu-tational Linguistics. Zimu Lu, Aojun Zhou, Ke Wang, Houxing Ren, Weikang Shi, Junting Pan, Mingjie Zhan, and Hong-sheng Li. 2024. Step-Controlled DPO: Leveraging Stepwise Error for Enhanced Mathematical Reason-ing. arXiv preprint .Haipeng Luo, Qingfeng Sun, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Jian-guang Lou, Chongyang Tao, Xiubo Geng, Qingwei Lin, Shifeng Chen, Yansong Tang, and Dongmei Zhang. 2023. WizardMath: Empowering Mathe-matical Reasoning for Large Language Models via Reinforced Evol-Instruct. arXiv preprint .Aman Madaan, Niket Tandon, Prakhar Gupta, Skyler Hallinan, Luyu Gao, Sarah Wiegreffe, Uri Alon, Nouha Dziri, Shrimai Prabhumoye, Yiming Yang, Shashank Gupta, Bodhisattwa Prasad Majumder, Katherine Hermann, Sean Welleck, Amir Yazdan-bakhsh, and Peter Clark. 2023. Self-Refine: Itera-tive Refinement with Self-Feedback. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 36, pages 46534–46594. Curran Associates, Inc. Subhabrata Mukherjee, Arindam Mitra, Ganesh Jawa-har, Sahaj Agarwal, Hamid Palangi, and Ahmed Awadallah. 2023. Orca: Progressive Learning from Complex Explanation Traces of GPT-4. arXiv preprint .Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Weizhe Yuan, He He, Kyunghyun Cho, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, and Jason E. Weston. 2024. Iterative Reasoning Preference Opti-mization. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Qwen, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang 9131 Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. 2025. Qwen2.5 Technical Report. arXiv preprint .Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn. 2023. Direct Preference Optimization: Your Lan-guage Model is Secretly a Reward Model. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 36, pages 53728–53741. Curran Associates, Inc. Mucheng Ren, Heyan Huang, Yuxiang Zhou, Qianwen Cao, Yuan Bu, and Yang Gao. 2022. TCM-SD: A Benchmark for Probing Syndrome Differentiation via Natural Language Processing. In Chinese Computa-tional Linguistics , pages 247–263, Cham. Springer International Publishing. Kumar Shridhar, Alessandro Stolfo, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023. Distilling Reasoning Capabilities into Smaller Language Models. In Findings of the As-sociation for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 ,pages 7059–7073, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics. Nisan Stiennon, Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Daniel Ziegler, Ryan Lowe, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Dario Amodei, and Paul F Christiano. 2020. Learn-ing to summarize with human feedback. In Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pages 3008–3021. Curran Associates, Inc. Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu, Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller, Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, Hakan Inan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa, Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten, Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu, Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan, Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Models. arXiv preprint .Rong-Cheng Tu, Wenhao Sun, Zhao Jin, Jingyi Liao, Jiaxing Huang, and Dacheng Tao. 2024. SPAgent: Adaptive Task Decomposition and Model Selection for General Video Generation and Editing. arXiv preprint .Bo Wang, Heyan Huang, Yixin Cao, Jiahao Ying, Wei Tang, and Chong Feng. 2024a. QRMeM: Unleash the Length Limitation through Question then Reflection Memory Mechanism. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 4837–4851, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics. Bo Wang, Heyan Huang, Xiaochi Wei, Ge Shi, Xiao Liu, Chong Feng, Tong Zhou, Shuaiqiang Wang, and Dawei Yin. 2023. Boosting Event Extraction with Denoised Structure-to-Text Augmentation. In Find-ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 11267–11281, Toronto, Canada. As-sociation for Computational Linguistics. Yubo Wang, Xueguang Ma, Ge Zhang, Yuansheng Ni, Abhranil Chandra, Shiguang Guo, Weiming Ren, Aaran Arulraj, Xuan He, Ziyan Jiang, Tianle Li, Max Ku, Kai Wang, Alex Zhuang, Rongqi Fan, Xiang Yue, and Wenhu Chen. 2024b. MMLU-Pro: A More Robust and Challenging Multi-Task Language Under-standing Benchmark. In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track .Kai Xiong, Xiao Ding, Yixin Cao, Ting Liu, and Bing Qin. 2023. Examining Inter-Consistency of Large Language Models Collaboration: An In-depth Analy-sis via Debate. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 7572–7590, Singapore. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Wei Xiong, Chengshuai Shi, Jiaming Shen, Aviv Rosen-berg, Zhen Qin, Daniele Calandriello, Misha Khal-man, Rishabh Joshi, Bilal Piot, Mohammad Saleh, Chi Jin, Tong Zhang, and Tianqi Liu. 2025. Building Math Agents with Multi-Turn Iterative Preference Learning. In The Thirteenth International Confer-ence on Learning Representations .Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. 2024. WizardLM: Empower-ing Large Pre-Trained Language Models to Follow Complex Instructions. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations .Yizhe Yang, Heyan Huang, Yang Gao, and Jiawei Li. 2024. Building knowledge-grounded dia-logue systems with graph-based semantic modelling. 

Knowledge-Based Systems , 298:111943. Jiahao Ying, Mingbao Lin, Yixin Cao, Wei Tang, Bo Wang, Qianru Sun, Xuanjing Huang, and Shuicheng Yan. 2024. LLMs-as-Instructors: Learn-ing from Errors Toward Automating Model Improve-ment. In Findings of the Association for Compu-tational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 11185– 11208, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Lifan Yuan, Ganqu Cui, Hanbin Wang, Ning Ding, Xingyao Wang, Boji Shan, Zeyuan Liu, Jia Deng, Huimin Chen, Ruobing Xie, Yankai Lin, Zheng-hao Liu, Bowen Zhou, Hao Peng, Zhiyuan Liu, and 9132 Maosong Sun. 2025. Advancing LLM Reasoning Generalists with Preference Trees. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representa-tions .Weizhe Yuan, Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Kyunghyun Cho, Xian Li, Sainbayar Sukhbaatar, Jing Xu, and Jason E Weston. 2024. Self-Rewarding Language Models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 57905–57923. PMLR. Eric Zelikman, Georges Raif Harik, Yijia Shao, Varuna Jayasiri, Nick Haber, and Noah Goodman. 2024. Quiet-STaR: Language Models Can Teach Them-selves to Think Before Speaking. In First Conference on Language Modeling .Xuan Zhang, Chao Du, Tianyu Pang, Qian Liu, Wei Gao, and Min Lin. 2024a. Chain of Preference Op-timization: Improving Chain-of-Thought Reasoning in LLMs. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Zhihan Zhang, Yixin Cao, Chenchen Ye, Yunshan Ma, Lizi Liao, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2024b. Analyzing Temporal Complex Events with Large Language Models? A Benchmark towards Temporal, Long Context Understanding. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1588– 1606, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Xiaofeng Zhou, Heyan Huang, Zewen Chi, Mucheng Ren, and Yang Gao. 2024. RS-BERT: Pre-training radical enhanced sense embedding for Chinese word sense disambiguation. Information Processing & Management , 61(4):103740. 9133 A Experimental Setting Details 

Datasets The data scale varies significantly across different categories in MMLU Pro. To en-sure a sufficient amount of test data, we adopt dif-ferent training-to-test split ratios: 1:1 for computer science, 3:1 for physics, and 2:1 for biology. When structuring information in the root nodes of prefer-ence trees, we filter out failed responses where the content is missing. Table 5 presents the detailed statistics of our dataset. Most of our debates can proceed to the sec-ond round, resulting in meaningful interactions be-tween the agents. In contrast, prior debate datasets contain a large proportion of debates that conclude after the initial round without further interaction. For the statistics of the previous debate data, please refer to Chen et al. (2024). With self-reflection and teacher feedback, agents in our framework can promptly correct errors after the second round, en-suring more consensual correct answers and re-ducing instances where debates terminate without reaching a valid solution. Furthermore, the number of SFT and T-DPO training instances generated from our debates is 2.5–7.7 times the number of debates, highlighting D&R’s efficient utilization of debate data for distillation. 

Models To ensure the reproducibility of our work, we use the following versions of the teacher and student models: gpt-4o-2024-08-06 for GPT-4o, claude-3-5-sonnet-20241022 for Claude 3.5, gemini-1.5-pro-002 for Gemini 1.5 Pro, and Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2 for Mistral-7B-Instruct. 

Implement Details For debate generation, we use the following generation configurations: 

temperature is 0.3, the hard limit max tokens 

is 700 (1000 for MATH and we also specify a soft limit in the prompt templates). For SFT, we train the student model on all datasets for 2 epochs with 

learning rate as 2e-4 and batch size as 16. For T-DPO, we train the student model on MMLU Pro for 3 epochs with learning rate 

as 5e-6 and batch size as 16. On MATH, we train the student model for 1 epoch with learning rate as 1e-6 and batch size as 16. We limit the total sequence length to 2000 and the prompt sequence length to 1400. For LoRA, we set the LoRA adapter rank as 16 and the alpha as 32. For evaluation, our generation configurations are 

temperature as 0.3, top_p as 0.9, and the hard limit max tokens as 700 (1000 for MATH). For the reimplementation of MAGD I, we follow its original training hyperparameters and generation configurations. 

B Quality Analysis of Debate Data 

Our debate data exhibits higher quality than tra-ditional debate data, providing clearer reasoning structures and more targeted feedback. In D&R, we introduce an improved debate data generation method that actively involves the student model and explicitly incorporates self-reflection and feed-back from teacher models. As a result, our training debate data is enriched with detailed reasoning and targeted guidance. To illustrate the advantages of our approach, Figure 10 presents a comparison be-tween our debate data and traditional debate data from MATH. For the problem of finding the greatest common divisor, the teacher model in our debate data clearly outlines the use of the Euclidean algorithm, system-atically performs the calculations, and verifies the result. In contrast, the debate data from Chen et al. (2024), constructed using a traditional approach, lacks an explicit mention of the prime factorization method and presents a less structured response. In our debate, the student model initially pro-duces an incorrect response. While it introduces the Euclidean algorithm, it actually applies prime fac-torization, making multiple calculation errors in the process. However, the inclusion of self-reflection and teacher feedback highlights these mistakes and provides explicit recommendations for correctly applying the Euclidean algorithm. This guidance plays a crucial role in shaping subsequent debate rounds. Traditional multi-agent debate frameworks provide agents only with prior responses, requir-ing them to independently compare answers and identify correct and incorrect elements. This pro-cess adds cognitive complexity, making it harder for the agents to reason effectively. In contrast, our method streamlines error correction by integrating self-reflection and feedback, offering clear sugges-tions for improvement. Consequently, in the fol-lowing debate rounds, agents can more efficiently rectify previous mistakes and generate more accu-rate responses, leading to a more effective learning process. 

C Token Cost 

We report averaged per-problem token cost on the test sets of three categories of MMLU Pro in Table 9134 Datasets # Training Debates Round (1/2/3/4) # R # SR # TF # SFT # T-DPO # Test Problems MATH 1000 85/606/149/160 9524 2579 4111 6957 7744 5000 Physics 974 136/696/104/38 7968 1722 3016 6246 4238 325 Biology 478 151/295/24/8 3380 553 1061 2827 1214 239 Computer Science 205 32/151/17/5 1620 340 554 1280 670 205 

Table 5: Detailed statistics of our datasets. Round (1,2,3,4) shows the number of debates with 1/2/3/4 rounds. R, SR, and TF represent Responses, Self-Reflection, and Teacher Feedback, respectively. # SFT is the number of SFT data constructed from debates. # T-DPO is the number of preference trees constructed from debates for T-DPO. 

Models MMLU Pro Avg. CS Physics Biology Mistral 601.87 692.51 586.92 627.10 MAGD I 578.05 619.64 533.54 577.08 ST Claude 555.38 550.27 556.16 553.94 D&R 520.24 584.17 482.07 528.83 Debate 17993.04 21789.26 10526.94 16769.75 

Table 6: Token cost on the three categories of MMLU Pro. For each category, we report the averaged per-problem token cost on test sets. 

Models MMLU Pro CS Physics Biology GPT-4o 75.12 74.77 88.70 Claude 3.5 77.07 77.54 87.87 Gemini 1.5 Pro 78.05 76.31 84.94 Debate 84.29 85.23 90.38 Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 46.83 39.38 65.27 with D&R SF T 50.24 44.92 71.97 with D&R 52.68 46.46 74.06 

Table 7: Results of teacher models, debates, and a more powerful student model, Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct, on the three categories of MMLU Pro. ✓ ✕

✓ ✕  

> Question
> Structured Information
> Step 2: The correct and incorrect nodes are chosen and rejected, respectively. From them, we trace back their debate history nodes as structured information.
> Step 1: Select a correct node, an incorrect node, and several nodes from the previous round.
> Step 3:
> Repeat steps 1-2 to construct more preference trees.

Figure 5: The schematic diagram showing how to con-struct preference trees from debates. 

6, which is used to calculate efficiency in Section 4.3.1. D&R learns to reach answers with better rea-soning paths and reduce failures during generation, hence has a better efficiency than Mistral, MAGD I,and ST Claude . Since knowledge and reasoning ca-pabilities have been distilled into the student model, there is no need to use multiple large models for debate. The token cost of D&R is much lower than that of debate. 

D More Results on MMLU Pro 

In Table 7, we report more results on the three cate-gories of MMLU Pro, including three teacher mod-els, debates, and Llama-3.1-8B-Instrct. The teacher models and debates achieve strong performance, ensuring the quality of distillation data. Besides MATH (as shown in Section 4.3.4), Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct also gain improvements on MMLU Pro. It demonstrates the broad applicability and robustness of D&R. 

E The Detailed Schematic Diagram for Constructing Preference Trees 

In Figure 5, we present a schematic diagram to complement Figure 2, illustrating the steps to con-struct preference trees: 1. Select a correct node, an incorrect node, and several nodes from the previous round. 2. The correct and incorrect nodes are chosen and rejected, respectively. From them, we trace back their debate history nodes as struc-tured information. 3. Repeat steps 1-2 to construct more preference trees. 

F Designed Prompt Templates in D&R 

In this section, we provide the prompt templates that are used in our D&R for generating debates and distillation in Figure 6, 7, 8, and 9. 9135 ### Instruction 

You are a helpful assistant aiming to answer the following question with reasoning. 

You are debating the input question with other agents. You are provided with all answers from the last round, along with 

their self-reflections and the feedback received. Please carefully consider these answers and output a new answer. 

Please output in the following format: 

``` 

### Answer 

<your step-by-step reasoning> 

Final answer: <your final answer> 

``` 

<choice prompt> Please keep your output concise and limit it to 500 words. Use the most short reasoning to get the 

correct answer. Do not output unrelated content! Do not explicitly mention other agents; instead, internally consider their 

answers. 

### Question 

<question> 

### Last Round Answers 

<structured information from last round> Figure 6: The prompt template for generating debates. ### Instruction 

You are a helpful assistant aiming to provide a feedback to yourself. 

Unfortunately, your previous answer to the question was incorrect. Given the correct final answer, please reflect on it and 

provide feedback on your incorrect response. You need to identify the potential incorrect knowledge, faulty reasoning or 

format errors in your incorrect response. Please check if your incorrect final answer has any formatting errors compared 

to the correct answer. 

Please output in the following format: 

``` 

### Feedback 

<your feedback> 

``` 

You don't need to apologize. 

Only output your feedback. Please keep your output concise and limit it to 500 words. Provide your most concise 

feedback. Do not output a new answer. 

### Question 

<question> 

### Correct Final Answer 

<gold answer> 

### Your Incorrect Answer 

<incorrect reasoning> 

Fianl answer: <incorrect answer> 

Figure 7: The prompt template for self-reflecting in debates. ### Instruction 

You are a helpful assistant aiming to provide a feedback to other agents. 

Congratulation! You answered the question correctly. Based on your correct answer, please help another agent who 

answered incorrectly. You should provide feedback by pointing out the potential incorrect knowledge, faulty reasoning or 

format errors in its response. Please check if its incorrect final answer has any formatting errors compared to the correct 

answer. 

Please output in the following format: 

``` 

### Feedback 

<your feedback> 

``` 

Only output your feedback. Please keep your output concise and limit it to 500 words. Provide your most concise 

feedback. Do not output a new answer. 

### Question 

<question> 

### Your Correct Answer 

<correct reasoning> 

Final answer: <correct answer> 

### Incorrect Answer from Another Agent 

<incorrect reasoning> 

Final Answer: <incorrect answer> 

Figure 8: The prompt template for generating feedback in debates. 9136 ### Instruction 

You are a helpful assistant aiming to answer the following question with step-by-step reasoning. 

Please output in the following format: 

``` 

### Answer 

<your step-by-step reasoning> 

Final answer: <your final answer> 

``` 

<choice prompt>Do not output unrelated content! 

### Question 

<question> Figure 9: The prompt template for D&R distillation. Question: 

What is the greatest common divisor of 128, 144 and 480? 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Teacher response in traditional debates: 

To find the greatest common divisor (GCD) of three numbers: 

1. Find the GCD of the first two numbers 

2. Then find the GCD of that number and the third number 

GCD(128, 144) 128 = 2^7 144 = 2^4 * 3^2 

The prime factors are 2 and 3. The greatest power of 2 that divides both numbers is 2^4.  GCD(128, 144) = 16 

GCD(16, 480) 480 = 2^5 * 3 * 5 16 and 480 are both divisible by 16. 

Therefore, GCD(128, 144, 480) = 16 

----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Teacher response in D&R training debates: 

Let's solve this step by step using the Euclidean algorithm: 

1) First, let's find GCD(128, 144) 

* 144 = 1 × 128 + 16 

* 128 = 8 × 16 + 0 

* So, GCD(128, 144) = 16 

2) Now, let's find GCD(16, 480) 

* 480 = 30 × 16 + 0 

* So, GCD(16, 480) = 16 

3) Therefore, GCD(128, 144, 480) = 16 

* We can verify this: 

* 128 = 16 × 8 

* 144 = 16 × 9 

* 480 = 16 × 30 

Final answer: 16 

Student response in D&R training debates: 

1. Find the greatest common divisors of 128 and 144 using the Euclidean algorithm. 

2. Set up the equation: a = bq + r, where a is the larger number, b is the smaller number, q is the quotient, and r is the remainder. 

3. Repeat step 1 with the new pair of numbers (b, r) until r is zero. 

4. The greatest common divisor (gcd) is the last non-zero value of b. 

5. Apply the same process to find the gcd of the gcd of 128 and 144, and 480. 

Final answer: $128 = 4 \cdot 32^2 \quad 144 = 4 \cdot 36^2 \quad 480 = 2^4 \cdot 5^2 \cdot 36^2$ 

Using the Euclidean algorithm: $128 = 4 \cdot 144 + 112 \quad 144 = 1 \cdot 112 + 32 \quad 112 = 3 \cdot 36 + 40 \quad 36 = 1 

\cdot 40 + 0$ 

...... 

Therefore, gcd(128, 144, 480) = 36. 

Self-reflection in D&R training debates: 

...... The prime factorization was then compared to find a common factor, but this approach is not necessary and can lead to incorrect 

results when dealing with larger numbers. The correct method is to use the Euclidean algorithm directly to find the greatest common 

divisor of 128, 144, and 480. 

Feedback in D&R training debates: 

The incorrect answer has several issues: 

1. The agent listed steps of the Euclidean algorithm but didn't actually execute them. Instead, they attempted to use prime 

factorization, which was unnecessary and led to incorrect calculations. 

2. The prime factorizations provided are incorrect: 

* 128 = 2^7 (not 4 · 32^2) 

* 144 = 2^4 · 3^2 (not 4 · 36^2) 

* 480 = 2^5 · 3 · 5 (not 2^4 · 5^2 · 36^2) 

...... 

The agent should have followed through with the Euclidean algorithm steps they outlined and provided a single number as the GCD. 

Figure 10: An example from the MATH dataset. Given the question, we show a response from Chen et al. (2024), which is generated with a traditional debate method without any self-reflection, feedback, and student models, and then two responses, a self-reflection, and feedback from our D&R training debates. Our debate data has a better quality with detailed responses, self-reflection, and feedback. 9137