Title: Attention-based graph neural networks: a survey

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.08679v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 00:34:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 59

Markdown Content:
Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

# Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

## Chengcheng Sun ∗1, Chenhao Li 1, Xiang Lin 1, Tianji Zheng 1, Fanrong Meng 1,2 , Xiaobin Rui 1 and Zhixiao Wang 1,2* 1School of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 221116, China. 

2Mine Digitization Engineering Research Center, Ministry of Education of the People’s Republic of China, Xuzhou, Jiangsu, 221116, China. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): zhxwang@cumt.edu.cn; 

Abstract 

Graph neural networks (GNNs) aim to learn well-trained representations in a lower-dimension space for downstream tasks while preserving the topological structures. In recent years, attention mechanism, which is brilliant in the fields of natural language processing (NLP) and computer vision (CV), is introduced to GNNs to adaptively select the discrimi-native features and automatically filter the noisy information. To the best of our knowledge, due to the fast-paced advances in this domain, a systematic overview of attention-based GNNs is still missing. To fill this gap, this paper aims to provide a comprehensive survey on recent advances in attention-based GNNs. Firstly, we propose a novel two-level taxonomy for attention-based GNNs from the perspective of devel-opment history and architectural perspectives. Specifically, the upper level reveals the three developmental stages of attention-based GNNs, including graph recurrent attention networks, graph attention networks, and graph transformers. The lower level focuses on various typical architectures of each stage. Secondly, we review these attention-based methods following the proposed taxonomy in detail and summarize the advantages and disadvantages of various models. A model characteristics table is also provided for a more comprehensive comparison. Thirdly, we share our thoughts on some open issues and future directions of attention-based GNNs. We hope this survey will provide researchers 

> ∗

Chengcheng Sun and Chenhao Li have contributed equally to this work. 

1

> arXiv:2605.08679v1 [cs.SI] 9 May 2026

Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 2 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey              

> with an up-to-date reference regarding applications of attention-based GNNs. In addition, to cope with the rapid development in this field, we intend to share the relevant latest papers as an open resource at https://github.com/sunxiaobei/awesome-attention-based-gnns.
> Keywords: Graph Neural Networks, Attention Mechanism, Graph Attention Networks, Graph Transformers, Graph Representation Learning

# 1 Introduction 

As a typical non-Euclidean data structure, graphs are ubiquitous in the real world, such as social networks, transportation networks, citation networks, and protein interaction networks. Recent deep learning research on graphs has attracted more and more attention due to the rich expressive power of deep learning models (Zhou et al, 2020). Graph neural networks (GNNs (Scarselli et al, 2008; Bruna et al, 2014)), as a kind of deep graph representation learning method, aim to learn nodes/edges/graphs-level representations in a lower-dimension space for various downstream tasks (e.g., node classification (Welling and Kipf, 2016), link prediction (Lv et al, 2021), community detection (Su et al, 2022), and graph classification (Ying et al, 2021)). Different from the traditional graph embedding methods (i.e., matrix factorization (Roweis and Saul, 2000) and random walk-based methods (Perozzi et al, 2014; Tang et al, 2015; Grover and Leskovec, 2016)), GNNs learn both the structural and attribute features of a graph through different neural networks. Due to this inherent advantage, GNNs can naturally be used to deal with graph-structured data with a large amount of attribute information (Yang et al, 2021c). Existing GNNs (Wu et al, 2020b), originating from graph convolution (Welling and Kipf, 2016), graph diffusion (Klicpera et al, 2019), graph atten-tion (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018) or other various mechanisms, are usually divided into two classical categories: spectral domain (Bruna et al, 2014; Defferrard et al, 2016; Welling and Kipf, 2016) and spatial domain (Hamilton et al, 2017; Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018; Xu et al, 2018a). Spectral graph neural networks realize topological convolution operations based on spectral graph theory and graph signal processing. Typical methods include SpectralCNN (Bruna et al, 2014), ChebNet (Defferrard et al, 2016), and GCN (Welling and Kipf, 2016). Spec-tral GNN is based on the Fourier transform and strongly depends on the graph Laplacian matrix (Welling and Kipf, 2016). Once the graph structure is determined, it is difficult to extend such methods to another new graph. Spa-tial graph neural networks directly aggregate and update the information of nodes from neighborhoods iteratively under message-passing neural networks (MPNN (Gilmer et al, 2017)). Considering the attributes of nodes/edges/-graphs, Graph Networks (GraphNet (Battaglia et al, 2018)) generalizes and extends various graph neural networks under message-passing mechanism and supports constructing complex architectures from simple building blocks. Most Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 3GNNs treat neighborhood nodes equally without considering the contributions of different nodes when aggregating and propagating information. However, real-world graphs are often noisy with connections between unrelated nodes, which causes GNNs to learn suboptimal representations without distinguishing nodes in neighborhoods (Kim and Oh, 2021). To avoid noisy signals, GAT (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018), a classical spatial graph neural network, introduces an attention mechanism into the graph neural network to learn the importance of different neighbors. Thereafter, attention becomes a popular mechanism used in a wide range of graph deep neural network architectures for better representation (Kim and Oh, 2021). Till now, there are a large number of attention-based graph neural networks. Attention in GNNs can be applied to different node neighborhoods, different parts of structures, and different representations of nodes, edges, and graphs. In 2019, a survey reviews several attention models in graphs from the per-spective of graph types, attention types, and task types (Lee et al, 2019b). After that, reviews of attention models in graphs have been vacant. Most reviews focus more on the taxonomy and application of existing GNNs (Wu et al, 2020b; Zhou et al, 2022; Georgousis et al, 2021; Wu et al, 2021b; Gao et al, 2022; Jiang and Luo, 2021; Cini et al, 2022), and they also describe GNNs in both the spectral domain and spatial domain. A comprehensive survey (Wu et al, 2020b) divides the state-of-the-art GNNs into four categories, including recurrent graph neural networks, convolutional graph neural networks, graph autoencoders, and spatial-temporal graph neural networks. To better address the challenges that exist in GNNs, a survey discusses several fundamental chal-lenge problems from both theoretical and practical perspectives (Georgousis et al, 2021). Other reviews cover more focused aspects of specific applica-tion domains, such as GNN4NLP (Wu et al, 2021b), GNN4RS (Gao et al, 2022), GNN4Traffic (Jiang and Luo, 2021), and GNN4IoT (Cini et al, 2022). Recently, an overview provides a review of various transformers for graphs from an architectural perspective (Min et al, 2022). Several attention-based GNNs are usually covered in the above reviews on GNNs, but they only list a few of the core literature on attention-based GNNs without further classification. By contrast, we aim to provide a systematic overview of attention-based GNNs from development history and architectural perspectives in this survey. Con-sidering the rapid evolution of this field, it’s imperative to sort out the existing attention-based GNNs and systematically analyze advanced methods for both academics and practitioners. However, to the best of our knowledge, an up-to-date, and comprehensive overview of attention-based GNNs is missing. To fill this gap, we present a novel two-level taxonomy from both developmental stages and architectural perspectives to systematically review attention-based GNNs. Existing attention-based graph neural networks can be divided into three stages, including Graph Recurrent Attention Networks (GRANs (Li et al, 2016; Zhang et al, 2018; Liao et al, 2019)), Graph Attention Networks (GATs (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018; Kim and Oh, 2021)), and Graph Transformers (Nguyen Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 4 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 濅濃濄濉 濅濃濄濋 濅濃濅濃 濚濥濔濡瀆 濚濔濧瀆 濚瀅濴瀃濻澳 濧瀅濴瀁瀆濹瀂瀅瀀濸瀅瀆 濅濃濄濉 濅濃濄濋 濅濃濅濃 濚濥濔濡瀆 濚濔濧瀆 濚瀅濴瀃濻澳 濧瀅濴瀁瀆濹瀂瀅瀀濸瀅瀆  

> Fig. 1 Three developmental stages of attention-based graph neural networks

et al, 2019; Zhang et al, 2020a), as shown in Figure 1. GRANs introduce the attention mechanism and RNN into graph neural networks. Due to the inher-ent limitations of RNN, the calculation of each step of GRANs usually depends on the results of the previous step. On the contrary, GATs do not need to rely on the previous results and can implement parallel operations. Most GATs focus on nodes in local neighborhoods with local attention, which distinguish the importance of different neighbors. However, GRANs and GATs also suffer from a common limitation: they cannot capture remote dependencies. Con-sider capturing remote messages, Graph Transformers can learn higher-order graph information directly with global attention. Each stage has its represen-tative and typical methods. Therefore, we further categorize these methods from an architectural perspective for each stage. In GRANs, most methods are inspired by attention-based Recurrent Neu-ral Networks (RNNs). Therefore, we naturally divide these methods into two subclasses. One is based on Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) (Zhang et al, 2018), and the other is attention-based Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) (Xu et al, 2018b). However, both of those methods are suffered from the long-time dependency bottleneck and the order problem that exists in RNNs. GATs assign different weights to nodes in the feature aggregation steps according to their influences. GAT (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018) is the pioneer of this stage. Later, a great variety of GATs, including C-GAT (Wang et al, 2019a), GATv2 (Brody et al, 2021), and SuperGAT (Kim and Oh, 2021), adopt differ-ent attention strategies to GNNs. We distinguish GATs from the perspective of whether the attention mechanism is in the neural network layer, namely intra-layer GATs and inter-layer GATs. For intra-layer GATs, the attention function is used to calculate the weights of different nodes in local neighborhoods, and then dynamically update the representation of nodes. For inter-layer GATs, attention is usually regarded as an operation of feature combination, which is used to select features from different levels, different channels, different views, or different time slices. Graph Transformers (Rong et al, 2020) can learn higher-order graph prop-erties directly, different from previous methods with local attention. In the past two years, Graph Transformers have developed rapidly in the field of graph deep learning, especially in the task of graph classification. However, the globally-connected self-attention mechanism in graph transformers makes it necessary to update the weights of the whole network continuously in the Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 5process of end-to-end model training (Ying et al, 2021; Kim et al, 2021b). This prevents them from exploiting sparsity in the graph topology, leading to excessively high computational complexity. In a word, this paper aims to provide a systematic and comprehen-sive review of contemporary attention-based graph neural networks. Our contributions can be summarized as follows. 

• This paper proposes a novel two-level taxonomy for attention-based GNNs from the perspective of development history and architecture. Specifically, the upper level reveals the three developmental stages of attention-based GNNs, including GRANs, GATs, and Graph Transformers. The lower level focuses on various typical architectures of each stage. 

• This paper comprehensively and systematically summarizes the latest works on attention-based GNNs, which makes up for the lack of literature in this hot direction. For each sub-category, we provide a detailed introduction and an in-depth comparison to reveal the advantages and disadvantages of various models. 

• This paper also provides open issues and challenges of attention-based GNNs as insights for future research directions to advance this field, which will provide researchers with an up-to-date reference about attention-based GNNs. The rest of this survey paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives the preliminaries and notations of attention-based GNNs. Section 3 provides a two-level taxonomy from the history and architectural perspectives. Section 4 presents a technical overview of GRANs. We introduce the GATs in both Section 5 and Section 6. Section 7 overviews Graph Transformers. In Section 8, we summarize and compare the characteristics of different models in sub-classes. We suggest promising future research directions in Section 9 and Section 10 comes to the conclusion of this paper. 

# 2 Preliminaries and Notations 

## 2.1 Graph 

A graph is a data structure defining a set of nodes and their relationships. As shown in Figure 2, unlike sequence-structured data in NLP and grid-structured data in CV, graph-structured data is extremely complex. Especially, the num-ber of neighbor nodes for each node is irregular. With the growth of the graph scale, the number of nodes in the graph often increases exponentially. Let G = ⟨V, E ⟩ represents an attributed graph with a feature matrix as 

X where V = {v1, v 2, · · · , v n} refers to the set of nodes, E = {e1, e 2, · · · , e m}

refers to the set of edges between nodes. We denote n = |V | as the number of nodes and m = |E| as the number of edges. X ∈ Rn×dim represents the feature matrix and its row element xi ∈ Rdim represents the feature vector of node vi

with the dimension dim . The adjacency matrix could represent the connection relationship between nodes, defined as A ∈ { 0, 1}n×n, where Aij = 1 means Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 6 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 漑濕漒濇濙濥濩濙濢濗濙 漑濖漒澻濦濝濘 漑濗漒澻濦濕濤濜 漑濕漒濇濙濥濩濙濢濗濙 漑濖漒澻濦濝濘 漑濗漒澻濦濕濤濜  

> Fig. 2 Examples of sequence-structured, grid-structured, and graph-structured data

that there is an edge eij between node vi and vj . We use di = P 

> j∈Γi

Aij to denote the degree of node vi , where Γ i is the neighborhood nodes of node 

vi. For a multi-relational graph, we extend the edge notation with edge type 

r ∈ R, as erij . Correspondingly, edge and graph can have attributes as well, defined as Xe, Xg . If not specified, for convenience we default X to represent the node attribute matrix. 

## 2.2 Graph Neural Networks 

Graph Neural Networks, a series of methods in Graph Representation Learn-ing (GRL) based on deep learning, take a source graph G as input, with an adjacency matrix A and feature matrix X. GNNs aim to learn a potential representation embedding vectors Z ∈ Rn×dim ′

in low dimensionality, i.e., 

dim ′ ≪ dim , which will play a key role in downstream tasks, such as node classification, link prediction, and graph classification. See Figure 3 for an illustration. L   

> 濁濄濂濂 澽濢濤濩濨濧 濈濕濧濟 濃濩濨濤濩濨
> L
> 濁濄濂濂 澽濢濤濩濨濧 濈濕濧濟 濃濩濨濤濩濨
> Fig. 3 The architecture of GNNs with the message-passing mechanism

From a spatial perspective, MPNN (Gilmer et al, 2017) can be seen as a more constrained instance of GraphNet (Battaglia et al, 2018), considering only the attributes of the nodes. They propagate information over the graph Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 7by a local diffusion process (Stachenfeld et al, 2020). The GraphNet block contains three update functions and three aggregation functions, while MPNN has only one pair of such functions. Taking node features X and graph structure A as inputs, GNNs can be defined as Zout = F (X, A, Θ), where Θ refers to the learnable weight parameter and F (·) denotes the GNN encoders such as GCNs, GATs even MLPs. Mathematically, we can define the general framework of graph neural networks with the message-passing mechanism as follows: 

M lvi = Agg l n 

Hl−1 

> vj

, ∀vj ∈ Γi

o 

(1) 

Hlvi = Comb l 

Hl−1 

> vi

, M lvi



(2) where Hl∈ Rn×dim represents the node features in the lth layer starting from the initial node features H0 = X. Γ i denotes the neighborhood node vi with a set of neighbors. M lvi refers to the received messages from neighbors in the neighborhood Γ i of the current node vi in the lth layer. From the view of the message-passing mechanism, GNN can be defined as two important functions: 

Agg (·) and Comb (·). Agg (·) is the aggregator function to aggregate the mes-sages from the neighbors of each node in the graph, while Comb (·) is the combined (or update) function to update the node representations by com-bining the received messages from neighbors and the representations of the current node in the former layer. For the node classification task in Figure 3, we can take Zout = HL as the output of graph neural networks after L layers. For graph-level tasks, an additional readout function Read (·) should be defined to read out the final representation HG of the entire graph or subgraph. There are a series of readout functions, such as average, sum, and max functions, which can be defined as below: 

HG = Read ({Hlv , ∀ v ∈ V }) (3) Take GCN for example, which is the most popular graph neural network due to its ease of understanding from the spatial domain as well as the the-oretical basis from the spectral domain (Xia et al, 2021a). GCN iteratively aggregates and updates the representations of nodes in the graph through a propagation rule (Welling and Kipf, 2016) defined as: 

Hl = σ

 eD− 12 eA eD− 12 Hl−1Θl



(4) where eA = A+In denotes the adjacency matrix with self-loop and eD represents the corresponding diagonal degree matrix. In refers to the identity matrix, and 

eD− 12 eA eD− 12 is a renormalization trick inspired by the symmetric normalized graph Laplacian Lsn = In − D− 12 AD − 12 . Θ is a trainable weight parameter and σ (·) is a non-linear activation function ReLU (x) = max(0 , x ). For the message-passing mechanism in GCN, we rewrite the above formula from the view of nodes as follows: Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 8 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Hlvi = σ

 X

> j∈Γi

eAij 

pdidj

Hl−1 

> vj

Θl + eAii 

√didi

Hl−1 

> vi

Θl

 (5) where di refers to the degree of node vi . Agg function in GCN is defined as the average of the neighbor node representations with a normalization constant based on degree. Comb function is defined as a simple summation function. 

## 2.3 Attention Mechanisms 

Attention is a mechanism based on the recognition process of the human visual system, which imitates the human cognitive awareness about specific informa-tion to focus more on the critical aspects of data (Guo et al, 2022; Brauwers and Frasincar, 2021). The attention mechanisms have been successfully applied to various application fields in CV, NLP, and GRL. Inspired by attention in CV (Guo et al, 2022) and NLP (Chaudhari et al, 2021), we give a generalized definition of attention and then decompose the attention process into three effective functions, i.e., alignment function, distribution function, and weighted sum function. The attention mechanism with different attention functions can be defined under a generalized framework: 

Attention = f (g (X) , X ) (6) where g (·) refers to an attention function to generate attention which cor-responds to capturing the important regions in the visual scene (Guo et al, 2022). f (·) means processing input data X to obtain important information based on the attention function g (·). In more detail, the attention mechanism (shown in Figure 4(a)) can be seen as a mapping of a sequence of keys K to an attention distribution α according to queries Q, and the keys have one-to-one corresponding values V (Chaudhari et al, 2021). In Figure 4(b), the attention function g (·) consists of two key components including an alignment function and a distribution function, while the f (·) is used as a weighted sum function to calculate the final attention value. The alignment function is a process of calculating the attention alignment score, which is the core of the attention mechanism (Chaudhari et al, 2021). There are many classical alignment functions in Table 1, defined as: 

scores = Sim (Q, K ) (7) The distribution function converts the attention score to the attention coefficients α. We define the distribution function in a unified form as below: 

α = N orm (scores ) (8) where, N orm (·) refers to a distribution function. The softmax function 

sof tmax (·) is the most commonly used distribution function, defined as: Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 9                                  

> Table 1 Summary of Common Alignment Functions. Function Equation Description Cos similarity Cos (K, Q )Cos (·): Cosine similarity Dot product QTKT: Matrix transpose Scaled dot product QTK√dim K
> dim K: Dimension of K
> General QTΘKΘ: trainable parameters Biased general QTΘK+bb: biase Additive ωTAct (Θ 1Q+ Θ 2K+b)ω: trainable parameters Concat ωTAct (Θ[ Q:K] + b)Act :activate function

sof tmax (xi) = exp (xi)

PNn=1 exp (xn) (9) where, xi ∈ X represents the i-th element in X and N is the total number of elements in X. exp (·) is an exponential function. With a softmax function, the calculated attention score is normalized to the probability distribution in [0 , 1] and sum to 1. Finally, an aggregation process for the attended representations with a weighted sum function to get the attention value: 

Z = f (X) = α V (10) Almost all existing attention mechanisms can be written into the above formulations under the generalized framework. When an attention mechanism is used to compute a representation of a single sequence, it is commonly referred to as self-attention or intra-attention (Tay et al, 2020). Generally, the complete self-attention layer (SAL) with scaled dot product can be expressed as: 

Z = SAL (Q, K, V ) = sof tmax QK T

pdim Q

!

V (11) The self-attention mechanism calculates the scaled dot product of the query with all the keys to find the similarity scores between them, and this product is normalized by the softmax function for obtaining the attention weight. The weighted sum function is used to get the attention value Z as outputs. Finally, the whole process of self-attention is shown in Figure 4(b). Further, we rewrite the self-attention layer under the generalized framework: 

Q, K, V = Linear (X) (12) 

scores = QK T

pdim Q

(13) Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 10 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 澜濕澝澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔濁濙濗濜濕濢濝濧濡 濇濣濩濦濗濙 濅澿 澥 澿 澦 澿 澧 瀥瀥瀥 澿 濢澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濊濕濠濩濙 濊濢瀥瀥瀥瀥 濊澧濊 澦濊澥 濇濣濩濦濗濙 濅澿 澥 澿 澦 澿 澧 瀥瀥瀥 澿 濢澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濊濕濠濩濙 濊濢瀥瀥瀥瀥 濊澧濊 澦濊澥 濇濣濩濦濗濙 濅澿 澥 澿 澦 澿 澧 瀥瀥瀥 澿 濢澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濊濕濠濩濙 濊濢瀥瀥瀥瀥 濊澧濊 澦濊澥 澜濖澝澔濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濅澔澔澔澔澔澿澔澔澔澔澔澔濊 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濁濕濧濟 濁濕濧濟 濇濗濕濠濙 濇濗濕濠濙 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濅澔澔澔澔澔澿澔澔澔澔澔澔濊 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濁濕濧濟 濇濗濕濠濙 濁濕濨濁濩濠 

濔濿濼濺瀁瀀濸瀁瀇 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濗濼瀆瀇瀅濼濵瀈瀇濼瀂瀁 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濪濸濼濺濻瀇濸濷澳 濦瀈瀀 

濇濗濕濠濙濘澔澸濣濨澡濄濦濣濘濩濗濨 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濇濗濕濠濙濘澔澸濣濨澡濄濦濣濘濩濗濨 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濇濗濕濠濙濘澔澸濣濨澡濄濦濣濘濩濗濨 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 澜濗澝澔濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澜濘澝澔濇濨濕濢濘濕濦濘澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澽濢濤濩濨濧 濈濕濦濛濙濨濧 濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濅 澿 濊濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澺澺濂 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濅澿濊濃濩濨濤濩濨澔濄濦濣濖濕濖濝濠濝濨濝濙濧 

LLK

濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 

dd 

澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 

 dd

濁濕濧濟濙濘 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 澷濦濣濧濧澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 澷濦濣濧濧澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 澜濖澝澔濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濅澔澔澔澔澔澿澔澔澔澔澔澔濊 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濁濕濧濟 濇濗濕濠濙 濁濕濨濁濩濠 

濔濿濼濺瀁瀀濸瀁瀇 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濗濼瀆瀇瀅濼濵瀈瀇濼瀂瀁 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濪濸濼濺濻瀇濸濷澳 濦瀈瀀 

濇濗濕濠濙濘澔澸濣濨澡濄濦濣濘濩濗濨 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 澜濗澝澔濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澜濘澝澔濇濨濕濢濘濕濦濘澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澽濢濤濩濨濧 濈濕濦濛濙濨濧 濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濅 澿 濊濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濅澿濊濃濩濨濤濩濨澔濄濦濣濖濕濖濝濠濝濨濝濙濧 

LLK

濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 

d 

澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 

 d

濁濕濧濟濙濘 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 澷濦濣濧濧澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 激濝濢濙濕濦 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濇濣濩濦濗濙 濅澿 澥 澿 澦 澿 澧 瀥瀥瀥 澿 濢澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濊濕濠濩濙 濊濢瀥瀥瀥瀥 濊澧濊 澦濊澥 澜濖澝澔濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濅澔澔澔澔澔澿澔澔澔澔澔澔濊 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濁濕濧濟 濇濗濕濠濙 濁濕濨濁濩濠 

濔濿濼濺瀁瀀濸瀁瀇 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濗濼瀆瀇瀅濼濵瀈瀇濼瀂瀁 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濪濸濼濺濻瀇濸濷澳 濦瀈瀀 

濇濗濕濠濙濘澔澸濣濨澡濄濦濣濘濩濗濨 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 澜濗澝澔濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澜濘澝澔濇濨濕濢濘濕濦濘澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澽濢濤濩濨濧 濈濕濦濛濙濨濧 濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濅 澿 濊濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濅澿濊濃濩濨濤濩濨澔濄濦濣濖濕濖濝濠濝濨濝濙濧 

LLK

濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 

d 

澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 

 d

濁濕濧濟濙濘 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 澷濦濣濧濧澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 激濝濢濙濕濦 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 澜濕澝澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔濁濙濗濜濕濢濝濧濡 濇濣濩濦濗濙 濅澿 澥 澿 澦 澿 澧 瀥瀥瀥 澿 濢澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濊濕濠濩濙 濊濢瀥瀥瀥瀥 濊澧濊 澦濊澥 濅澿濊濁濕濧濟濙濘 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 澷濦濣濧濧澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澜濖澝澔濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濅澔澔澔澔澔澿澔澔澔澔澔澔濊 濁濕濨濁濩濠 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 濁濕濧濟 濇濗濕濠濙 濁濕濨濁濩濠 

濔濿濼濺瀁瀀濸瀁瀇 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濗濼瀆瀇瀅濼濵瀈瀇濼瀂瀁 濙瀈瀁濶瀇濼瀂瀁 濪濸濼濺濻瀇濸濷澳 濦瀈瀀 

濇濗濕濠濙濘澔澸濣濨澡濄濦濣濘濩濗濨 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 澜濗澝澔濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澜濘澝澔濇濨濕濢濘濕濦濘澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澽濢濤濩濨濧 濈濕濦濛濙濨濧 濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濅 澿 濊濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濅澿濊濃濩濨濤濩濨澔濄濦濣濖濕濖濝濠濝濨濝濙濧 

LLK

濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 

d 

澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 

 d

濁濕濧濟濙濘 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 澷濦濣濧濧澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 激濝濢濙濕濦 濇濣濚濨濁濕濬 

Fig. 4 The architecture of attention, self-attention, multi-head attention, and standard transformer 

α = sof tmax (scores ) (14) 

Z = α V (15) where Linear (·) refers to a linear transformation, QT is a matrix transpose operation. QT K is the dot product operation, which is widely used in self-attention to calculate the attention score. The attention mechanism in GNNs allows the neural networks to learn a dynamic and adaptive aggregation of the neighborhood as well as enables the model to avoid or ignore noisy parts of the graph (Thekumparampil et al, 2018). Based on attention functions, we define three types of attention mech-anisms in GNNs including local attention, global attention, and feature fusion attention. Local attention focuses on local neighbors, that is, directly or locally con-nected neighbors. GAT (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018) learns different aggregating weights for each neighbor representation through local attention, as shown in Figure 5(a). Treating normalized attention coefficients as the relative weights between node pairs, attention-based GNNs aggregate and update the repre-sentations of nodes in the graph with a weighted sum function, then propagate them to higher layers (Klicpera et al, 2019). As shown in Figure 5(b), the self-attention mechanism in graph transformers can be viewed as passing mes-sages among all nodes in the entire graph with global attention, regardless of Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 11 the input graph connectivity (Chen et al, 2019). Different from local attention and global attention, feature fusion attention directly adopts the traditional attention mechanisms, focusing on feature fusion beyond the node, as shown in Figure 5(c). 漑濕漒激濣濗濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 漑濖漒澻濠濣濖濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 漑濗漒澺濙濕濨濩濦濙澔澺濩濧濝濣濢澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 漑濕漒激濣濗濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 漑濖漒澻濠濣濖濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 漑濗漒澺濙濕濨濩濦濙澔澺濩濧濝濣濢澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢  

> Fig. 5 Different attention mechanisms in GNNs. Local attention focuses only on the direct neighbors of the central node, while global attention focuses on all nodes in the graph. Feature fusion attention is a weighted approach from the perspective of feature fusion using an attention mechanism.

From the node view, let hli, h lj ∈ Hl refers to the representation of the node vi and vj in the lth ∈ L layer, and h0 

> i

= x0 

> i

as the input features of node 

vi. As an initial step, a shared linear transformation with a weight matrix Θl is applied to every node in the graph. After the linear transformation, the alignment function obtains the attention alignment score, which indicates the importance of its local neighbors. In addition, the distribution function con-verts the attention score to the attention coefficient, which makes the attention coefficients comparable across different nodes. Finally, the weighted sum func-tion is used to update and aggregate the representations of nodes in the graph. The above local attention layer can be defined as follows: 

hli = Θ l xli , h lj = Θ l xlj (16) 

scores lij = Sim  hli, h lj

 (17) 

αlij = N orm  scores l (18) 

hl+1  

> i

= σ

X

> j∈Γi

αlij hlj

 (19) where σ denotes the non-linear activation function. Γ i refers to the local neigh-borhoods of the given node vi, which is exactly the first-order node in GAT. 

Sim (·) represents the alignment functions (listed in Table 1) and N orm (·) is the distribution functions, such as softmax, and sigmoid. The softmax function is defined in Equation 9 and the sigmoid function is defined as: 

sigmoid (x) = 11 + exp (−x) (20) The alignment function in GAT with a single-layer feed-forward neural network parameterized by ωT ∈ R2 dim denotes as: Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 12 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

scores lij = LeakyReLU  ωT hli∥hlj

 (21) where [ ·∥· ] refers to the operation of vector concatenation and LeakyReLU (·)represents an activation function. Compared with ReLU (·), LeakyReLU (·)introduces a constant parameter λ ∈ (0 , 1), defined as: 

LeakyReLU (x) = 

( x, if x > 0

λx, if x ≤ 0 (22) The other widely used alignment function is a dot-product operation in self-attention, especially in Graph Transformers. The self-attention mechanism linearly projects the center node feature hli to get the query vector and project the neighboring node features hlj to get the key and value vectors. The dot-product operation from the node view can be expressed as: 

scores lij = hliT hlj (23) To stabilize the learning process of self-attention, multi-head self-attention is also introduced into attention-based GNNs. While the multi-head attention aggregator can explore multiple representation subspaces between the center node and its neighborhoods (Brody et al, 2021). Every self-attention block contains its queries, keys, values, and learnable weight matrices, as shown in Figure 4(c). We summarize the two forms of multi-head self-attention blocks: concatenated multi-head and averaging multi-head. Multi-head self-attention (MHSA) with a concatenate operation can be formulated as: 

hl+1  

> i

= M HSA (head 1, head 2, · · · , head K ) = ∥Kk=1 σ

 X

> j∈Γi

αlk ij Θlk hlk j

 (24) where ∥ represents concatenation, αlk ij refers to the normalized attention coef-ficients computed by the kth attention head in the lth layer. σ is the non-linear activation function. And the averaging multi-head can be formulated as: 

hl+1  

> i

= M HSA (head 1, head 2, · · · , head K ) = σ

 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

X

> j∈Γi

αlk ij Θlk hlk j



(25) Transformers are deep feed-forward artificial neural networks with a self-attention mechanism (Phuong and Hutter, 2022). Similar to the traditional Transformer in Figure 4(d), Graph Transformers take multi-head self-attention as the core component. The Graph Transformer is introduced as a novel encoder-decoder architecture built with multiple blocks of self-attention, with-out convolution or recurrent modules (Yun et al, 2019). Each Transformer Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 13 layer has two parts: multi-head self-attention modules and a position-wise feed-forward network (FFN) (Yang et al, 2022b). The generalized graph trans-former with multi-head self-attention (MHSA) and feed-forward block (FFN) can be defined as: 

zl+1 = LayerN orm  M HSA  hl + hl (26) 

hl+1 = LayerN orm  F F N  zl+1  + zl+1 (27) where zl+1 is the output of the first stage in the graph transformer layer. 

LayerN orm (·) is the layer normalization layer. hl+1 is the final output of this transformer block, the representations of the node in ( l + 1) th layer. The FFN layer with a non-linear activation function can be defined as: 

F F N  hl = σ  hl Θ1 + b1

 Θ2 + b2 (28) 

# 3 Taxonomy of Attention-based GNNs     

> Table 2 The characteristics of different developmental stages
> Stages Characteristics GRANs
> Local attention. Limited by the long-term dependence bottleneck and order problem of RNN.
> GATs Intra-layer Local attention. Stacking layers leads to high complexity and over-smoothing.
> Inter-layer
> Feature fusion attention. Feature selection operation from different feature spaces, such as different levels, different channels, different views, or different time slices.
> Graph Transformers
> Global attention. Directly obtain high-order neighborhood information. Catastrophic Spatio-temporal complexity and limited on large-scale graphs.

In this section, we outline a novel two-level taxonomy for attention-based GNNs from the perspective of development history and architectural perspectives. The upper level reveals the three developmental stages of attention-based graph neural networks, including Graph Recurrent Attention Networks (GRANs), Graph Attention Networks (GATs: intra-layer and inter-layer), and Graph Transformers. We summarize their characteristics in Table 2. The lower level focuses on various typical architectures of each stage, as shown in Figure 6. Figure 6 shows the two-level taxonomy of attention-based GNNs. The color in the figure represents the type of attention mechanism employed in a category. GRANs: This kind of works focus on recurrent neural networks(RNNs) to learn representations of graph-structured data. GRANs are inspired by Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 14 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澡濖濕濧濙濘澔澻濂濂濧 澻濆澵濂濧 澽濢濨濦濕澡濠濕濭濙濦澔澻澵濈濧 澻濦濕濤濜 濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦濧 澻濆濉澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濇濈濁澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澽濢濨濙濦澡濠濕濭濙濦澔澻澵濈濧 濂濙濝濛濜濖濣濦澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澼濝濛濜澡濃濦濘濙濦 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 濄濣濣濠濝濢濛澣濇濕濡濤濠濝濢濛 澼濝濙濦濕濦濗濜濝濗濕濠澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濆濙濠濕濨濝濣濢澡澵濫濕濦濙澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澼濭濤濙濦澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濁濩濠濨濝澡激濙濪濙濠 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濁濩濠濨濝澡澷濜濕濢濢濙濠 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濁濩濠濨濝澡濊澽濙濫 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濣澡濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濈濝濡濙澔濇濙濦濝濙濧澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 濇濨濕濢濘濕濦濘澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦濧 澻濂濂澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦濧 激濣濗濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澻濠濣濖濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澺濙濕濨濩濦濙澔澺濩濧濝濣濢澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澡濖濕濧濙濘澔澻濂濂濧 澻濆澵濂濧 澽濢濨濦濕澡濠濕濭濙濦澔澻澵濈濧 澻濦濕濤濜 濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦濧 澻濆濉澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 激濇濈濁澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澽濢濨濙濦澡濠濕濭濙濦澔澻澵濈濧 濂濙濝濛濜濖濣濦澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澼濝濛濜澡濃濦濘濙濦 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 濄濣濣濠濝濢濛澣濇濕濡濤濠濝濢濛 澼濝濙濦濕濦濗濜濝濗濕濠澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濆濙濠濕濨濝濣濢澡澵濫濕濦濙澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澼濭濤濙濦澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濁濩濠濨濝澡激濙濪濙濠 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濁濩濠濨濝澡澷濜濕濢濢濙濠 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濁濩濠濨濝澡濊澽濙濫 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濣澡濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濈濝濡濙澔濇濙濦濝濙濧澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 濇濨濕濢濘濕濦濘澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦濧 澻濂濂澔濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦濧 激濣濗濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澻濠濣濖濕濠澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澺濙濕濨濩濦濙澔澺濩濧濝濣濢澔澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 

Fig. 6 Classification breakdown of methods for attention-based GNNs 

attention-based recurrent neural networks(RNNs) in deep learning (Liao et al, 2019). Therefore, we naturally divide these methods into two subclasses: GRU-Attention (Zhang et al, 2018) and LSTM-Attention (Xu et al, 2018b). Intra-layer GATs: This kind of works introduce the attention mechanism into the local neighborhoods in the single-layer neural network with local attention. The intra-layer GATs (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018) usually place the local attention on the local neighborhoods in the graph within a single-layer neural network. Intra-layer GATs can be further divided into six subclasses, namely neighbor attention (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018), high-order attention (Yang et al, 2019), relation-aware attention (Li et al, 2020c; Busbridge et al, 2019), hierarchical attention (Wang et al, 2019d; Lin et al, 2022), attention sampling/pooling (Abu-El-Haija et al, 2018; Knyazev et al, 2019), and hyper-attention (Zhang et al, 2020b). Specifically, neighbor attention only considers the direct neighborhoods, while high-order attention takes kth -hop neighbor-hoods and subgraphs into consideration. Relation-aware attention takes into account different types of relations. In addition to focusing on node-level attention, hierarchical attention also considers higher-level attention, such as path, group, and relationship. Attention sampling/pooling refers to attention-based GNNs used for sampling or pooling. Hyper-attention represents special attention mechanisms for hypergraphs. Inter-layer GATs: This kind of works usually select features beyond neu-ral network layers with multiple feature spaces, not just local neighborhoods. Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 15 

> Table 3  Categories of each developmental stage and representative works.
> Categories  Representative works GRANs GRU-Attention  GGNN (Li et al, 2016), GRNN (Ruiz et al, 2020), GaAN (Zhang et al, 2018), GRAN (Liao et al, 2019)
> LSTM-Attention  JK-Net (Xu et al, 2018b), GAM (Lee et al, 2018), GeniePath (Liu et al, 2019b)
> Intra-layer GATs Neighbor Attention
> GAT (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018), DMP (Yang et al, 2021b), SuperGAT (Kim and Oh, 2021), CPA (Zhang and Xie, 2020), GATv2 (Brody et al, 2021), PPRGAT (Choi, 2022), Simple-HGN (Lv et al, 2021), DPGAT (Brody et al, 2021), C-GAT (Wang et al, 2019a), GANet (Gao and Ji, 2019), CAT (He et al, 2021), MSNA (Wang et al, 2020c), AGNN (Thekumparampil et al, 2018), HTNE (Zuo et al, 2018), HAT (Zhang et al, 2021d), HGCN (Chami et al, 2019), Hype-HAN (Zhang and Gao, 2021), DKGAT (Yang et al, 2020b), DAGL (Mou et al, 2021), SCGA (Kim et al, 2021c), Co-GAT (Qin et al, 2021a), ED-GAT (Ma et al, 2020), TD-GAT (Huang and Carley, 2019), GATON (Yang et al, 2020a), GRAM (Choi et al, 2017)
> High-Order Attention
> SPAGAN (Yang et al, 2019), PaGNN (Yang et al, 2021d), CGAT (Cao et al, 2020), ADSF (Zhang et al, 2019), MAGNA (Wang et al, 2021), T-GAP (Jung et al, 2021a)
> Relation-Aware Attention
> SiGAT (Huang et al, 2019b), SNEA (Li et al, 2020c), RGAT (Busbridge et al, 2019), WRGNN (Suresh et al, 2021), HetSANN (Hong et al, 2020), EAGCN (Shang et al, 2018), TALP (Li et al, 2020b), KGAT (Wang et al, 2019c), GATNE (Cen et al, 2019), CGAT (Lin and Wang, 2020), RelGNN (Qin et al, 2021b), AFE (Nathani et al, 2019), DisenKGAT (Wu et al, 2021a), GTAN (Zhang et al, 2021b), R-GAT (Wang et al, 2020a), ReGAT (Li et al, 2019), AD-GAT (Cheng and Li, 2021)
> Hierarchical Attention
> HAN (Wang et al, 2019d), PSHGAN (Mei et al, 2022), PRML (Zhao et al, 2017), GraphHAM (Lin et al, 2022), LAN (Wang et al, 2019b), RGHAT (Zhang et al, 2020c), DANSER (Wu et al, 2019b), UVCAN (Liu et al, 2019a), GCATSL (Long et al, 2021), DAGC (Sun et al, 2020), AGCN (Li et al, 2020a), HGAT (Yang et al, 2021e)
> Attention Sampling/Pooling
> GAW (Abu-El-Haija et al, 2018), NLGCN (Liu et al, 2021), SAGPool (Lee et al, 2019a), Attpool (Huang et al, 2019a), ChebyGIN (Knyazev et al, 2019)
> Hyper-Attention  Hyper-SAGNN (Zhang et al, 2020b), HHGR (Zhang et al, 2021a), HyperTeNet (Vijaikumar et al, 2021), Hyper-GAT (Bai et al, 2021)
> Inter-Layer GATs Multi-Level Attention  DAGNN (Liu et al, 2020), TDGNN (Wang and Derr, 2021), GAMLP (Zhang et al, 2022c)
> Multi-Channel Attention  FAGCN (Bo et al, 2021), ACM (Luan et al, 2021)
> Multi-View Attention  AM-GCN (Wang et al, 2020b), MV-GNN (Yuan et al, 2021b), GENet (Tang et al, 2021), UAG (Feng et al, 2021), MVE (Qu et al, 2017) , MGAT (Tao et al, 2020)
> Spatio-Temporal Attention
> DySAT (Sankar et al, 2018), TemporalGAT (Fathy and Li, 2020), GAEN (Shi et al, 2021a), MMDNE (Lu et al, 2019), TGAT (Xu et al, 2020), T-GNN (Xu et al, 2022), ST-GCN (Yan et al, 2018), GMAN (Zheng et al, 2020), ASTGCN (Guo et al, 2019), ConSTGAT (Fang et al, 2020)
> Time Series Attention  RainDrop (Zhang et al, 2021c), MTAD-GAT (Zhao et al, 2020), GACNN (He and Shin, 2020)
> Graph Transformers Standard Transformers
> Graphormer (Ying et al, 2021), HOT (Kim et al, 2021b), PAGAT (Chen et al, 2019), GTA (Seo et al, 2021), GT (Dwivedi and Bresson, 2020), SAN (Kreuzer et al, 2021), GraphBert (Zhang et al, 2020a), UniMP (Shi et al, 2021b)
> GNN Transformers
> GROVER (Rong et al, 2020), UGformer (Nguyen et al, 2019), GMT (Baek et al, 2021), GTN (Yun et al, 2019), GraphFormers (Yang et al, 2021a), HGT (Hu et al, 2020b), GTOS (Cai and Lam, 2020), GraphWriter (Koncel-Kedziorski et al, 2019), KHGT (Xia et al, 2021b), GATE (Ahmad et al, 2021), STAGIN (Kim et al, 2021a)

Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 16 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Across the neural network layer, attention in inter-layer GATs can be regarded as an operation of cross-layer fusion of different feature spaces with feature fusion attention. In this term, attention-based GNNs dynamically select fea-tures from different levels, different channels, different views, or different time slices. Therefore, we further divide these methods into five sub-categories (i.e., multi-level attention (Liu et al, 2020; Zhang et al, 2022c), multi-channel (Bo et al, 2021; Luan et al, 2021), multi-view (Wang et al, 2020b; Yuan et al, 2021b), Spatio-temporal attention (Sankar et al, 2018; Lu et al, 2019), and time series attention (Zhang et al, 2021c; Zhao et al, 2020)). By consider-ing temporal attributes, Spatio-temporal attention usually uses time, spatial attention, or both in dynamic graphs, while time-series attention needs to construct dynamic graphs from time-series data first. Graph Transformers: In the past two years, Transformers (Lin et al, 2021) have achieved superior performance in many tasks of NLP, CV, and GRL. Graph Transformers generalize the Transformer architecture to graph rep-resentation learning, capturing long-range dependency (Ying et al, 2021). Different from previous methods with local attention, Graph Transformers learn higher-order graph properties directly via global attention. Graph Trans-formers have developed rapidly in the field of graph deep learning, especially in the task of graph classification on small and medium-sized graphs. We further divide Graph Transformers into two sub-categories, namely standard Transformers (Ying et al, 2021) and GNN Transformers (Nguyen et al, 2019). Standard Transformers usually utilize the self-attention mechanism to all nodes of the input graph, ignoring adjacencies between nodes, while GNN Transformers use the GNN layer to obtain adjacency information. We tabularize representative works for each sub-category in the differ-ent stages as shown in Table 3. In the following sections, we detail each representative work in terms of motivation, characteristics, or functions 

# 4 GRANs 

GRANs are inspired by attention-based recurrent neural networks (RNNs). Table 3 shows the representative works of two kinds of GRANs, namely GRU-Attention and LSTM-Attention. 

## 4.1 GRU-Attention 

Gated Recurrent Units (GRU) can be regarded as operators acting on the current input and previous state to control how much of the input should be taken into account, and how much past information should be remembered (or forgotten) in the computation of the new state (Ruiz et al, 2020). Based on the previous work on GNNs (Scarselli et al, 2008), GGNN intro-duces GRU with a soft attention mechanism. The graph representation in GGNN uses context to focus attention on which nodes are important to the current graph-level task (Li et al, 2016). Further, GRNN proposes a general learning framework leveraging the notion of a recurrent hidden state together Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 17 with graph signal processing (GSP) (Ruiz et al, 2020). Under this framework, GRNN generates meaningful representations of graph signals by incorporating the importance of a node’s features to its neighbors with three different gating mechanisms: time, node, and edge gates. Unlike the traditional multi-head attention mechanism, which equally com-putes all attention heads, GaAN uses a convolutional sub-network to control each attention head’s importance (Zhang et al, 2018). GaAN assigns different importance to each head through computing an additional soft gate mech-anism between 0 and 1, 0 for low importance and 1 for high importance (Zhang et al, 2018). Similar to the graph generation task in GaAN, GRAN captures the auto-regressive conditioning between the already-generated and to-be-generated parts of the graph using GNNs with attention, which not only reduces the dependency on node ordering but also bypasses the long-term bottleneck caused by the sequential nature of RNNs (Liao et al, 2019). 

## 4.2 LSTM-Attention 

Another classic and simple RNN structure is Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM). GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al, 2017) first introduces the LSTM in GNNs as an aggregator, different from mean and pooling aggregators. Coop-erating with sampling, GraphSAGE aggregates the messages from the local neighborhood of the node through the aggregator. In the same way, JK-Net (Xu et al, 2018b) adapts LSTM-Attention as a layer-aggregation to aggregate the jumping representations from the previous layers. LSTM-Attention in JK-Net is node adaptive because the attention scores are different for each node (Xu et al, 2018b). Due to the ability to capture long-range dependencies, GAM adopts an LSTM and proposes a solution for graph classification based on attention-guided walks (Lee et al, 2018). The attention mechanism in GAM focuses on small but informative parts of the graph and avoids noise in the rest of the graph. GeniePath proposes an adaptive path layer with two complementary functions: breadth function and depth function (Liu et al, 2019b). The adap-tive breadth function learns the importance of different sized neighborhoods and adaptively selects a set of important 1-hop neighbors with a parameter-ized generalized linear attention operator. While the adaptive depth function for depth exploration can extract useful signals and filter noisy signals up to long-distance neighbors with a gated unit. Even though LSTMs have a more sophisticated memory model when compared to simple RNNs, it has been shown that they still have trouble remembering information that was inputted too far in the past (Lee et al, 2018). 

# 5 Intra-Layer GATs 

Considering different local neighborhoods and different functions, intra-layer GATs can be further divided into six subclasses including neighbor attention, high-order attention, relation-aware attention, hierarchical attention, attention Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 18 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

sampling/pooling, and hyper-attention. Table 3 shows the representative works of each subclass. 

## 5.1 Neighbor Attention 

As the most famous attention network, GATs are widely used in a variety of graph-structured data scenes. GATs with neighbor attention compute the hidden representations of each node in the graph by attending to its neighbors in the local neighborhoods. GAT takes the lead in introducing the attention mechanism into graph neural networks to aggregate representations of local neighbor nodes in the graph (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018). Every node in GAT attends to the neighbors in its neighborhood and treats its representation as a query (Brody et al, 2021). GAT takes a single-layer feed-forward neural network (FFN) as an alignment function to calculate the attention scores: 

scores lij = LeakyReLU 



ωT

h

Θ hli∥Θhlj

i 

(29) where scores lij indicates the importance of the node vj to node vi in the 

lth layer. As an initial step, the FFN adopts a shared linear transformation, parametrized by a weight matrix Θ, to perform feature transformation for every node in the graph. With a learnable weight vector ω ∈ R2 dim , the FNN applies the LeakyReLU as a non-linear activation function. Ignoring uncon-nected node pairs, GAT only computes the masked attention for each node with its first-order neighbors via local attention, as shown in Figure 5(a). Subsequently, GAT normalizes the attention scores using the softmax function: 

αij = sof tmax j (scores ij ) = exp (scores ij )

P 

> k∈Γi

exp (scores ik ) (30) where vj and vk are the neighbor nodes in the neighborhood Γ i of node vi.Different from the non-negative distribution function via a softmax non-linear function in GAT, DMP (Yang et al, 2021b) takes tanh as a non-linear function, whose output is zero-centered and ranged in ( −1, 1), defined as: 

αij = tanh (scores ij ) = exp (scores ij ) − exp (−scores ij )

exp (scores ij ) + exp (−scores ij ) (31) In DMP, the positive weights correspond to low-passing filtering capturing the similarity between nodes, while the negative weights facilitate the filtering of high-frequency to reduce the difference (Bo et al, 2021; Yang et al, 2021b). In addition, GAT adapts the multi-head attention to stabilize the learning process of self-attention. A concatenated multi-head concatenates the output representations of different heads. An averaging multi-head is employed to average the representations of different heads in the final layer as output for the prediction task. The attention function in GAT always weighs one key at least as much as any other key, unconditioned on the query (Brody et al, 2021). To address this limitation, GATv2 (Brody et al, 2021) makes a simple fix by modifying the order of operations in the alignment function, defined as: Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 19 

scores lij = ωT LeakyReLU 



Θ

h

hli∥hlj

i 

(32) GATv2 performs an additional empirical comparison to DPGAT (Brody et al, 2021), applying the scaled dot-product attention of the Transformer (Vaswani et al, 2017): 

scores lij = (hliT

ΘQ)( hljT ΘK )T

√dim (33) PPRGAT (Choi, 2022) incorporates the Personalized PageRank (PPR (Klicpera et al, 2018)) information into the GAT and GATv2, which utilizes the full potential of GATs. For this, the alignment functions in GAT and GATv2 are modified as: 

scores lij = LeakyReLU 



ωT

h

Θ hli∥Θhlj ∥Πij 

i 

(34) 

scores lij = ωT LeakyReLU 



Θ

h

hli∥hlj ∥Πij 

i 

(35) where Π ij is the PPR matrix in the preprocess step before starting the train-ing. Simple-HGN (Lv et al, 2021) also adopts the same method for feature concatenation with the edge relationship type between the node vi and vj .Instead of the soft graph attention operator (GAO) in GAT, GANet (Gao and Ji, 2019) introduces the hard attention operator (HGAO) and channel-wise graph attention operator (CGAO) with dot product attention. HGAO uses the hard attention mechanism by attending to only important nodes, while CGAO avoids the dependency on the adjacency matrix, leading to dra-matic reductions in computational resource requirements (Gao and Ji, 2019). Besides considering the layer-wise node features propagated within the GNN, CAT learns representations of nodes in the graph with conjoint attention, considering additional structural information, such as node cluster embedding and higher-order structural correlations when computing attention scores (He et al, 2021). MSNA (Wang et al, 2020c) extracts comprehensive and expressive neighborhood features with two neighborhood attention including self neigh-borhood attention network (SNAN) and cross neighborhood attention network (CNAN). The SNAN predicts the link of two nodes by encoding and match-ing their respective neighborhood information, while the CNAN with a cross neighborhood attention directly captures structural interactions between two nodes (Wang et al, 2020c). To alleviate the over-fitting problem, C-GAT (Wang et al, 2019a) pro-poses two additional margin-based constraints as loss functions on GAT. CPA preserves cardinality information in attention-based aggregation, which can be applied to any kind of attention mechanisms (Zhang and Xie, 2020). To improve the graph attention model for noisy graphs, SuperGAT (Kim and Oh, 2021) exploits two commonly used attention mechanisms: a single-layer feed-forward neural network (FFN) in GAT and a dot product (DP), for a self-supervised task to predict edges (Kim and Oh, 2021). Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 20 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Apart from FNN and dot product, there are a series of classical attention-based GNNs adopting other alignment functions to calculate attention scores, such as cosine similarity and Euclidean distance. AGNN (Thekumparampil et al, 2018) removes all the intermediate fully-connected layers and replaces the propagation layers with an attention mechanism that computes attention with cosine similarity. HTNE chooses a negative Euclidean distance function to score the affinity between the source and history node to better determine the influence of historical neighbors on the current neighbors of a node (Zuo et al, 2018). Beyond Euclidean space, HAT (Zhang et al, 2021d) attempts the GAT with an attention mechanism in hyperbolic space (Yang et al, 2022a). To cal-culate the attention, HAT transforms the features in a graph into gyrovector space and then proposes the attention-based hyperbolic proximity to aggre-gate the features (Zhang et al, 2021d). HGCN also introduces a hyperbolic attention-based aggregation scheme based on the Riemannian manifold, to learn inductive node representations for hierarchical and scale-free graphs (Chami et al, 2019). Hyperbolic attention operation makes use of hyperbolic geometry in both the computation of the attention weights and the aggrega-tion operation (Gulcehre et al, 2018). Further, Hype-HAN is a hierarchical embedding method based on three types of hyperbolic manifolds on Rieman-nian geometries (Yang et al, 2022a), including the Lorentz model, Klein model, and Poincar´ e model, for text classification tasks (Zhang and Gao, 2021). Up to the present, a great variety of graph attention networks and their variants have been proposed in many artificial intelligence fields, such as nat-ural language processing (Qin et al, 2021a; Ma et al, 2020; Huang and Carley, 2019; Yang et al, 2020a), computer vision (Yang et al, 2020b; Mou et al, 2021; Kim et al, 2021c), and medical health (Choi et al, 2017). In the field of natural language processing, we can think of words as nodes and then construct graph models. GNNs with neighbor attention utilize the dependency relationship among words for sentiment analysis (Qin et al, 2021a; Ma et al, 2020; Huang and Carley, 2019), and topic modeling (Yang et al, 2020a). GRAM proposes a graph-based attention model for healthcare representation learning (Choi et al, 2017). For computer vision, many works have extended neighbor atten-tion to extracting local features in images or videos, e.g., 3D object recognition (Yang et al, 2020b), image restoration (Mou et al, 2021), and video-grounded dialogue (Kim et al, 2021c). 

## 5.2 High-Order Attention 

Neighbor attention often only focuses on aggregating information from first-order neighbors within each layer. To obtain the representations of higher-order neighbors, the conventional approach is stacking multiple layers, which also brings high complexity and over-smoothing (Yang et al, 2019). Such an attention mechanism is limited because it does not consider nodes that are not connected by an edge, which could provide important contextual information. In Figure 7, high-order attention (path-based and k-hop neighbors) aggregates Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 21 information from distant neighbors and explores the graph topology, all in a single neural network layer(Yang et al, 2019). 漑濕漒濄濕濨濜濧 漑濖漒澿澡濜濣濤澔濢濙濝濛濜濖濣濦濜濣濣濘濧 漑濕漒濄濕濨濜濧 漑濖漒澿澡濜濣濤澔濢濙濝濛濜濖濣濦濜濣濣濘濧    

> Fig. 7 Higher-order message-passing along paths and k-hop neighborhoods. Path-based message-passing provides a mechanism for aggregating messages along meta-paths, while k-hop neighborhoods aggregate messages from different hop neighborhoods.

To account for higher-order neighbors, one can stack multiple layers to enlarge the size of the receptive field, horribly bringing high complexity. The other is high-order neighbors in a single neural network layer, achieved by shortest paths, to capture the more global graph topology. Unlike conven-tional neighbor attention that carries out node-based attention within each layer, SPAGAN proposes path-based attention accounting for the influence of a sequence of nodes, or shortest path, between the current node and its higher-order neighbors (Yang et al, 2019). PaGNN (Yang et al, 2021d) devel-ops a novel path-aware GNN for link prediction, integrating inter-action and neighborhood information via broadcasting and aggregating operations. To effectively preserve the structural topology and semantic properties in het-erogeneous information networks, CGAT (Cao et al, 2020) adopt multiple meta-paths-based sampling and pre-training process with pair-wise attention. To fully exploit rich, high-order structural details in GATs, ADSF (Zhang et al, 2019) proposes an adaptive structural fingerprints model. The key idea of ADSP is to update the representation of each node within a local recep-tive field consisting of its high-order neighbors. Modeling attention flow on graphs is another way to obtain higher-order information, which effectively contributes to the information flow implemented through message passing (Xu et al, 2018c). To eliminate noisy high-frequency information from the graph, MAGNA (Wang et al, 2021) captures large-scale structural information in each layer with a low-pass filter. MAGNA propagates the attention scores across the graph with Personalized PageRank, increasing the receptive field for each layer of the GNN (Wang et al, 2021). Similarly, T-GAP models a path traver-sal with the soft approximation of attention flow, iteratively propagating the attention value of each node to its outgoing neighbor nodes (Jung et al, 2021a). Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 22 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

## 5.3 Relation-Aware Attention 

Most of the interactions in social networks are positive relationships, such as friendship, following, and support. Meanwhile, some negative links exist in the real world indicating disapproval, disagreement, or distrust (Huang et al, 2019b). However, some of the graphs are signed graphs with both positive and negative links in Figure 8(a). GAT is designed to graph only considering pos-itive links and ignoring the negative ones in the signed graph. Signed Graph Attention Networks (SiGAT) generalizes GAT to signed graphs (Huang et al, 2019b), which incorporates graph motifs into GAT to capture two famous theories in the signed graph, i.e., balance and status theory. In SiGAT, differ-ent motifs represent different relation-aware influences, when aggregating and propagating messages on the signed graph to generate node embeddings via an attention mechanism (Huang et al, 2019b). Also in the signed graph, SNEA computes the importance coefficient for pair nodes connected by different types of links when aggregating the embedding with a self-attention mechanism (Li et al, 2020c).          

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 漑濕漒濇濝濛濢濙濘澔澻濦濕濤濜 漑濖漒澼濙濨濙濦濣濛濙濢濙濣濩濧澔澔澻濦濕濤濜
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 漑濕漒濇濝濛濢濙濘澔澻濦濕濤濜 漑濖漒澼濙濨濙濦濣濛濙濢濙濣濩濧澔澔澻濦濕濤濜
> 
> 
> Fig. 8 Relation-aware neighborhoods in signed graph and heterogeneous graph. (a) There are two types of edges in the signed graph: positive and negative. (b) Different color blocks represent different types of relationships.

More complex than signed networks, heterogeneous information networks (HINs) are also ubiquitous in our daily life. As shown in Figure 8(b), HINs usually consist of various types of vertices connected by various types of rela-tions (Zheng et al, 2022; Wang et al, 2022). Taking into consideration edge type r ∈ R, the attention function on HINs to calculate the attention scores can be defined as: 

scores rij = LeakyReLU  ωT Θr hri ∥Θr hrj

 (36) 

αrij = exp  scores rij 

P

> k∈Γri

exp (scores rik ) (37) 

hl+1  

> i

= σ

X

> r∈R

X

> j∈Γri

αrij Θr hlj

 (38) where r ∈ R is the type of edge, Γ ri refers to the neighborhood of the node vi

with the edge type r.Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 23 Different relations convey distinct pieces of information. Relation-aware graph attention networks aggregate information with a masked self-attention that takes account of local relational structure as well as node features. Con-sidering the relation between nodes in HINs, RGAT proposes two variants, Within-Relation Graph Attention (WIRGAT) and Across-Relation Graph Attention (ARGAT), under an additive and multiplicative logit construction (Busbridge et al, 2019). HetSANN (Hong et al, 2020) aggregates multi-relational information in neighborhoods with two kinds of attention scoring functions. In HetSANN, the type-aware attention layer adopts the voices-sharing product. WRGAT (Suresh et al, 2021) transforms the input graph into a computation graph containing both proximity and structural information with the different types of edges. The generated multi-relational graph has a high-level assortativity and preserves rich structural information from the original graph (Suresh et al, 2021). EAGCN proposes an edge attention-based multi-relational GCN on chemical graphs with multiple relationships (Shang et al, 2018). To avoid the fusion vector ignoring the effects of the local type information, TALP models the effect of type information and fusion informa-tion from local and global perspectives simultaneously (Li et al, 2020b), based on a two-layer graph attention architecture. KGAT adaptively aggregates the embeddings from neighbors of the current node and updates the node’s rep-resentation with an attention mechanism to distinguish the importance of the neighbors (Wang et al, 2019c). To capture the influential information in dif-ferent edge types, GATE formalizes the attributed multiplex heterogeneous network embedding problem as well as uses the attention mechanism (Cen et al, 2019). In particular, RelGNN (Qin et al, 2021b) generates the states of different relations and leverages them along with the node states to weigh the messages. Further, RelGNN balances the importance of attribute features and topological features via a self-attention mechanism and then generates the final represen-tations of nodes (Qin et al, 2021b). To learn both node and topic embeddings while preserving the graph structural information, CGAT (Lin and Wang, 2020) guides information aggregation via a channel-aware attention mechanism focusing on the edges. Relational graph attention networks play a significant role in some specific scenarios with rich relational structure information, such as knowledge graph (Nathani et al, 2019; Wu et al, 2021a; Zhang et al, 2021b), NLP (Wang et al, 2020a), CV (Li et al, 2019), and stock prediction (Cheng and Li, 2021). Since knowledge graphs are inherently graph-structured data with multiple relationship types, relation-aware attention is well-suited for tasks in knowledge graphs, such as relation prediction (Nathani et al, 2019), knowl-edge graph completion (Wu et al, 2021a), and question answering (Zhang et al, 2021b). 

## 5.4 Hierarchical Attention 

Heterogeneous information networks (HINs) contain rich semantic information and hierarchical information, such as different types of nodes and links (Wang Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 24 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 漑濕漒濂濣濘濙澡濄濕濨濜 漑濖漒濂濣濘濙澡濆濙濠濕濨濝濣濢      

> ggg ggg ggg ggg
> 漑濕漒濂濣濘濙澡濄濕濨濜 漑濖漒濂濣濘濙澡濆濙濠濕濨濝濣濢
> ggg ggg
> Fig. 9 Hierarchical attention with node-path and node-relation. In addition to node-level attention, hierarchical attention often has higher-level attention, such as path, and relation.

et al, 2022). In Figure 9(a), different meta-paths in HINs may extract diverse semantic information, while the relation-based hierarchical attention is illus-trated in Figure 9(b). Based on meta-paths, HAN (Wang et al, 2019d) designs a heterogeneous graph neural network with hierarchical attention including node-level and semantic-level attention. The node-level attention learns the importance between a node and its meta-path-based neighbors, while the semantic-level attention learns the importance of different meta-paths (Wang et al, 2019d). Then HAN generates node representations by aggregating the received information from meta-path-based neighbors in a hierarchical man-ner. Similarly, PSHGAN (Mei et al, 2022) first learns the weights of two nodes in the meta-path or meta-structure via a local attention mechanism. Then, PSHGAN learns a global attention weight based on meta-paths and meta-structures. In the end, PSHGAN uses computed dual-level attention to aggregate and update the representations of nodes. PRML (Zhao et al, 2017) focuses on both node-level and path-level attention proximity of the endpoints based on their betweenness paths to discriminate the representations. RGHAT, equipped with a hierarchical attention mechanism including entity- and relation-level attention, can effectively aggregate the local neigh-borhood information of each entity (Zhang et al, 2020c). The entity-level attention highlights the importance of different neighboring entities under the same relation, while the relation-level attention is inspired by the intuition that different relations have different weights for indicating an entity (Zhang et al, 2020c). LAN aggregates neighbor information with both rules- and network-based attention weights (Wang et al, 2019b) and focuses on both neighborhood features and query relations. GraphHAM (Lin et al, 2022) aggregates neighbor-ing states to generate node embeddings with group-level and individual-level attention for graph embedding. GraphHAM captures the information from neighborhoods of different scopes by stacking multiple layers, where the node states output by a lower layer are used as input to the layer above it (Lin et al, 2022). Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 25 Hierarchical attention-based GNNs are widely used in recommender sys-tems (Wu et al, 2019b; Liu et al, 2019a), synthetic lethality (Long et al, 2021), point cloud (Sun et al, 2020), action detection (Li et al, 2020a), and short text classification (Yang et al, 2021e). 

## 5.5 Attention Sampling/Pooling 

Grap sampling is an effective method to select representative nodes from a large number of nodes (Hamilton et al, 2017), as shown in Figure 10(a). That is often adopted for large-scale graphs to improve efficiency (Zeng et al, 2019). GraphSAGE (Hamilton et al, 2017) first learns an aggregator function that generates embeddings by sampling and aggregating features from a node’s local neighborhood. Taking account of the attention mechanism, GAW (Abu-El-Haija et al, 2018) guides the random walk to optimize an upstream objective via the proposed attention model on the power series of the transition matrix. Furthermore, the attention mechanism in GAW only guides the random walk with a softmax function under the learning procedure (Abu-El-Haija et al, 2018). To distinguish the importance of nodes, NLGAT (Liu et al, 2021) pro-poses a simple yet effective non-local aggregation framework with efficient attention-guided sorting for GNNs. 漑濕漒濇濕濡濤濠濝濢濛 漑濖漒濄濣濣濠濝濢濛 漑濕漒濇濕濡濤濠濝濢濛 漑濖漒濄濣濣濠濝濢濛  

> Fig. 10 Sampling and Pooling in GNNs. Sampling is often used when messages are aggre-gated, while pooling is often used for readout operations for graph classification tasks.

To generalize GNNs to larger, more complex, or noisy graphs, graph pooling aims to remove any number of nodes, so that the receives smaller graph turns into an input graph in the following layer, such as DiffPool (Ying et al, 2018). For attention-based graph pooling in Figure 10(b), the attention mechanism in the local neighborhood could distinguish the nodes that should be dropped and the nodes that should be retained. SAGPool (Lee et al, 2019a) is a graph pooling method based on self-attention. Self-attention in SAGPool allows the proposed pooling method to consider both node features and graph topology (Lee et al, 2019a). To learn hierarchical representation for graph embedding, AttPool (Huang et al, 2019a) selects nodes that are significant for graph-level representation adaptively and then generates hierarchical features via the attention-based aggregator. ChebyGIN designs simple graph reasoning tasks to study the attention in GNNs under a controlled environment, and results Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 26 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

show that attention can make GNNs more robust to larger and noisy graphs (Knyazev et al, 2019). 

## 5.6 Hyper-Attention 

Modeling complex relationships between objects, hypergraphs exploit the high-order relationship and local clustering structure by hyperedges beyond a pairwise formulation (Zhang et al, 2022b), as shown in Figure 11. Recently, Hypergraphs with high-order relationships and variable hyperedges, attract much attention from researchers focusing on graph representation learning (Zhang et al, 2022a).  

> Fig. 11 HyperGraph. Different color blocks represent different Hyper-edges. Hyper-edges are the interactions that occur between multiple nodes.

Considering the complex relationships in hypergraphs, Hyper-SAGNN (Zhang et al, 2020b) develops a new GNN model for the graph representation learning of general hypergraphs with various hyperedges. Since group members have different importance, HHGR (Zhang et al, 2021a) adopts a weighted sum function to generate the attentive group representation under a double-scale self-supervised setting. The hierarchical hypergraph convolutional network in HHGR consists of an attention-based group aggregator, which captures the user interactions within and beyond groups by propagating information from the user level to the group level (Zhang et al, 2021a). To learn the multi-hop relationship among the nodes in hypergraphs, HyperTeNet (Vijaikumar et al, 2021) designs a self-attention-based hypergraph neural network to learn the ternary relationships among the interacting nodes in a 3-uniform hypergraph. Hyper-GAT enhances the capacity of representation learning in high-order encoded by hyperedges with an attention module (Bai et al, 2021). 

# 6 Inter-Layer GATs 

Across the neural network layer, inter-layer GATs combine representations from different feature spaces via feature fusion methods. According to different fusion methods, we divide these attention-based GNNs into five sub-categories, including multi-level attention, multi-channel attention, multi-view attention, Spatio-temporal attention, and time series attention, as listed in Table 3. Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 27 

## 6.1 Multi-Level Attention 

Through stacking neural network layers, GNNs could learn node representa-tions by aggregating the information from the multi-hop neighborhoods (Zhang et al, 2022c). One layer of neighborhood aggregation in GNNs only consid-ers immediate neighbors, but the performance decreases when going deeper to enable larger receptive fields due to over-smoothing (Liu et al, 2020). Repeated propagation and aggregation make node representations indistinguishable from different classes (Li et al, 2018). To overcome the limitation of over-smoothing, some work has attempted to improve GNNs (Xu et al, 2018b; Liu et al, 2021; Li et al, 2018). Among them, some works adaptively select multi-level features cross-layer with an attention mechanism, as shown in Figure 12.                                   

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> ggg
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg
> 
> 
> 
> 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> ggg
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg ggg
> 
> 
> 
> 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔
> Fig. 12 Multi-level attention with different receptive fields. For central node v0, its final representation is a combination of representations from different levels of neighborhoods through an attention mechanism.

DAGNN (Liu et al, 2020) transforms and propagates the representations of nodes with the ability to capture information from large and adaptive recep-tive fields. Specifically, DAGNN decouples transformation and propagation to leverage large receptive fields with multi-hop neighborhoods. For each node, DAGNN balances the information from local and global neighborhoods with an attention mechanism, thus leading to more discriminative node representa-tions (Liu et al, 2020). To alleviate feature smoothing among different layers, TDGNN (Wang and Derr, 2021) further disentangles neighborhoods in dif-ferent layers with a tree decomposition process. TDGNN flexibly aggregates information from large receptive fields utilizing a deeper multi-hop depen-dency with graph diffusion (Wang and Derr, 2021). To better combine the propagated features, GAMLP (Zhang et al, 2022c) adopts three receptive field attention mechanisms including smoothing attention, recursive attention, and JK attention. 

## 6.2 Multi-Channel Attention 

Generally, most existing GNNs can be seen as low-pass filter, that updates node representations by aggregating information from neighbors in neighborhoods (Wu et al, 2019a). In the low-pass filter, GNNs make use of node features as Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 28 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

low-frequency signals, which are based on the assortative assumption that the node tends to connect with similar nodes. Sometimes, the useful high-frequency signals that capture the difference between nodes are mixed or ignored (Bo et al, 2021). Different nodes in the graph may have different needs for the information in the different channels (frequency) (Luan et al, 2021), as shown in Figure 13. 濜濝濛濜 濠濣濫 濜濝濛濜 濠濣濫 濜濝濛濜 濠濣濫  

> 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 濜濝濛濜 濠濣濫 濜濝濛濜 濠濣濫 濜濝濛濜 濠濣濫
> 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢澔
> Fig. 13 Multi-channel attention with high- and low-frequency signals. Left: Low- and high-frequency information is aggregated by attention-weighted. Right: Update the representation of the central node based on messages from neighborhoods and itself in the upper layer.

FAGCN (Bo et al, 2021) adaptively aggregates signals with different fre-quencies during message passing. FAGCN first designs an experimental study about low-frequency and high-frequency signals, where the results show that exploring low-frequency signals only is distant from learning an effective node representation in different scenarios (Bo et al, 2021). Based on this obser-vation, FAGCN presents a novel frequency adaptation graph convolutional network via an attention mechanism to adaptively combine the low-frequency and high-frequency signals (Bo et al, 2021). Also considering different signals, ACM (Luan et al, 2021) proposes a framework to adaptively exploit aggrega-tion, diversification, and identity channels to address harmful heterophily. To adaptively aggregate information from different channels, ACM learns node-wise attention to combine the different signals in three channels (Luan et al, 2021). 

## 6.3 Multi-View Attention 

Multi-view graph representation learning learns representations of nodes in the graphs with multiple views, such as different topologies, which aims to generate more robust node representations from different views (Yuan et al, 2021b). The multi-view GNNs usually integrate the embeddings from multiple feature spaces of different views to update the final node representations, and not all views aggregator subspaces are equally important. As shown in Figure 14, Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 29 the attention mechanism in multi-view GNNs learns the adaptive importance weights of the embeddings from different views, to aggregate the view-specific node representations on each view (Yuan et al, 2021b). 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濊濝濙濫濧 濁濄濂濂濧 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濃濩濨濤濩濨     

> gggggg
> 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛
> 濊濝濙濫濧 濁濄濂濂濧 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濃濩濨濤濩濨
> gggggg
> 澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢
> Fig. 14 Multi-View attention. Construct different graph structures for message passing and then use attention for message fusion.

To combine topological structures and node features substantially, AM-GCN (Wang et al, 2020b) selects the specific and common representations from different views including topological structures, node features, and their combinations simultaneously. AM-GCN first constructs a new graph topol-ogy based on features, named feature graph. With the feature graph and the topology graph, AM-GCN adaptively learns the deep correlation information in the feature space, topology space, and both of them, via an attention mech-anism (Wang et al, 2020b). UAG develops a Bayesian Uncertainty Technique (BUT) to explicitly capture uncertainties in GNNs and further employs an Uncertainty-aware Attention Technique (UAT) (Feng et al, 2021). The UAT in UAG defends the adversarial attack on GNNs by assigning less impact on nodes with high uncertainty, thus, mitigating their impact on the final prediction (Feng et al, 2021). Based on the three views reflecting local, global structure, and feature sim-ilarity of nodes, MV-GCN (Yuan et al, 2021b) designed an attention-based strategy to fuse the node representations from different views. GENet (Tang et al, 2021) introduces ensemble learning into GNNs based on different views with a drop-edge mechanism to construct subgraphs of different topological Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 30 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

spaces (Rong et al, 2019). Each member in the ensemble model generates indi-vidual embedding from different topology spaces and has a powerful capacity to resist noise perturbations in graph data (Tang et al, 2021). MVE (Qu et al, 2017) promotes the collaboration of different views and lets them vote for robust representations with an attention mechanism. During the voting pro-cess in MVE, the attention mechanism enables each node to focus on the most important views. MGAT (Tao et al, 2020) utilizes an attention-based architec-ture to learn node representations from different multi-view. To collaboratively integrate multiple types of relationships in different views, MGAT aggregates the view-wise node representations via view-focused attention (Xie et al, 2020). 

## 6.4 Spatio-Temporal Attention 

In the real world, some graph-structured data often show dynamic proper-ties with continuously evolving network nodes and topology over time, named dynamic graphs (Kazemi et al, 2020). Compared to static graph learning, learning representations on dynamic graphs is challenging due to the temporal dependencies over time. For dynamic graph representation learning, we usu-ally divide the dynamic graph into different snapshots, according to different time windows, as shown in Figure 15. Then, the dynamic graph representation learning learns low-dimensional node representations among a series of graph snapshots over the time step. 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔濙濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濈濝濡濙 

> 灄灄灄

澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔濙濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 

> 濈濝濡濙
> 灄灄灄

澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢  

> Fig. 15 Spatio-Temporal Attention in Dynamic Graph. Fusing messages from different time slices with attention mechanisms.

DySAT (Sankar et al, 2018) learns node representations that capture both structural properties and temporal evolutionary patterns. In detail, DySAT generates node representations by jointly applying self-attention layers along two dimensions including structural neighborhood and temporal dynamics (Sankar et al, 2018). TemporalGAT (Fathy and Li, 2020) employs the self-attention mechanism and structural neighborhoods over temporal dynamics Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 31 with a temporal convolutional network. Considering the neighborhoods in different snapshots, TemporalGAT learns dynamic node representation via self-attention strategy without violating the ordering of the graph snapshots (Fathy and Li, 2020). For dynamic graph representation learning, GAEN (Shi et al, 2021a) pro-vides an evolving graph attention network across different time points. In addition, GAEN allows attention weights to share and evolve across all tempo-ral networks based on their respective topology discrepancies (Shi et al, 2021a). From the perspective of micro-and macro-dynamics, MMDNE (Lu et al, 2019) designs a temporal attention point process to capture structural and temporal properties at a fine-grained level. The micro-dynamics introduce the formation process of network structures in detail, while the macro-dynamics indicate the evolution pattern of the network scale (Lu et al, 2019). Considering continuous time in dynamic graphs, TGAT (Xu et al, 2020) presents a time-aware graph attention network to aggregate temporal-topological neighborhood features for inductive representation learning on temporal graphs. To handle continuous time, TGAT proposes a theoretically-grounded functional time encoding with a self-attention mechanism (Xu et al, 2020). Spatio-temporal attention has been successful in many application scenarios that can be modeled as dynamic graphs (Xu et al, 2022; Yan et al, 2018; Zheng et al, 2020; Guo et al, 2019; Fang et al, 2020). In CV, spatio-temporal attention is applied to modeling a dynamic graph from a series of images at different times, such as trajectory prediction (Xu et al, 2022), and action recognition (Yan et al, 2018). Traf-fic prediction, including traffic flow forecasting (Zheng et al, 2020; Guo et al, 2019) and travel time estimation (Fang et al, 2020), is the most common appli-cation scenario of spatio-temporal attention because of the large amount of spatio-temporal traffic network data in our daily life. 

## 6.5 Time Series Attention 

A huge volume of data is generated overtime associated with various real-world systems. These data sets are often indexed by time, space, or both requiring appropriate approaches to analyze the data (Silva et al, 2021). Time series anal-ysis usually works on common tasks, including forecasting, anomaly detection, and classification (Wen et al, 2022). If there are some association relationships between the time-series data that can be mined, graph neural networks can also play a role in time-series analysis. Numerous sensors have been deployed in different geospatial locations to continuously and cooperatively monitor the surrounding environment, such as climate science (Zhang et al, 2021c). As shown in Figure 16, these sensors generate multiple geo-sensory time series, with spatial correlations between their readings (Liang et al, 2018). To estimate the latent sensor graph structure and leverage the structure together with nearby observations, RainDrop (Zhang et al, 2021c) embeds irregularly sampled and multivariate time series while also learning the dynam-ics of sensors purely from observational data to predict misaligned readouts. For capturing time-varying dependencies among sensors, RainDrop can be Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 32 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 濈濝濡濙    

> 濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢
> 濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濈濝濡濙 濈濝濡濙
> 濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢
> 濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濈濝濡濙 濈濝濡濙
> 濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢
> 濈濙濡濤濣濦濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濇濤濕濨濝濕濠 濗濣濦濦濙濠濕濨濝濣濢 濈濝濡濙

Fig. 16 Graph Attention in Time Series. Constructing graphs from a temporal and spatial perspective, modeling time series data with graphs. 

interpreted as a graph neural network that sends messages over graphs with a self-attention mechanism (Zhang et al, 2021c). To capture the relationships between different time series explicitly, MTAD-GAT (Zhao et al, 2020) consid-ers each univariate time series as an individual feature and includes two graph attention layers in parallel to learn the complex dependencies of multivariate time series in both temporal and feature dimensions (Zhao et al, 2020). Two parallel graph attention layers in MTAD-GAT learn the relationships between different time series and timestamps dynamically (Zhao et al, 2020). GBikes (He and Shin, 2020) proposes a data-driven Spatio-temporal Graph attention convolutional neural network (GACNN) for Bike station-level flow prediction. Based on the data-driven designs, GACNN predicts the fine-grained bike flows to/from each station, with attention mechanisms capturing and differentiating station-to-station correlations (He and Shin, 2020). 

# 7 Graph Transformers 

Taking into account whether the model uses the GNN layer to obtain adjacency information, we divide graph transformers into two sub-categories, i.e., stan-dard Transformers and GNN Transformers. We enumerate the representative methods of standard Transformers and GNN Transformers in Table 3. 

## 7.1 Standard Transformers 

Graph Transformers propagate node representations among all nodes in the graph regardless of whether two nodes are directly connected, while GAT focuses only on connected adjacent nodes. PAGAT (Chen et al, 2019) builds on longer-range dependencies in graph structure data and uses path features in molecular graphs to create a global attention layer. As shown in Figure 17, to utilize traditional Transformer architecture in the graph, it is necessary to define an effective position encoding with structural information of a graph, such as Laplacian encoding (Dwivedi and Bresson, 2020), relation encoding (Cai and Lam, 2020), centrality encoding, and edge Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 33 澵澺濙濕濨濩濦濙濧 

> 澾澾

瀑瀑

> 濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛

濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 澷濙濢濨濦濕濠濝濨濭澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 激濕濤濠濕濗濝濕濢澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 濆濙濠濕濨濝濣濢澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 瀥瀥瀥 

> KL

濆濙濕濘濣濩濨 濆濙濕濘濣濩濨 澻濦濕濤濜澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濂濣濘濙澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵澺濙濕濨濩濦濙濧 

> 澾

瀑

> 濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛

濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 澷濙濢濨濦濕濠濝濨濭澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 激濕濤濠濕濗濝濕濢澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 濆濙濠濕濨濝濣濢澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 瀥瀥瀥 

> KL

濆濙濕濘濣濩濨 澻濦濕濤濜澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濂濣濘濙澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 澵澺濙濕濨濩濦濙濧 

> 澾

瀑

> 濄濣濧濝濨濝濣濢濕濠 澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛

濌澷濣濢濗濕濨 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 激濝濢濙濕濦 澷濙濢濨濦濕濠濝濨濭澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 激濕濤濠濕濗濝濕濢澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 濆濙濠濕濨濝濣濢澔澹濢濗濣濘濝濢濛 瀥瀥瀥 

> KL

濆濙濕濘濣濩濨 澻濦濕濤濜澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濂濣濘濙澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 澺澺濂 澵濘濘澔澚澔濂濣濦濡 濁濩濠濨濝澡澼濙濕濘 濇濙濠濚澡澵濨濨濙濢濨濝濣濢 

Fig. 17 The architecture of Graph Transformers. The attention mechanism in Graph Trans-formers can be seen as a fully connected GAT. 

encoding (Ying et al, 2021). GT (Dwivedi and Bresson, 2020) proposes a gen-eralization of transformer networks to homogeneous graphs of the arbitrary structure via Laplacian eigenvectors as positional features. By leveraging the full spectrum of the Laplacian, SAN (Kreuzer et al, 2021) can better detect similar sub-structures from their resonance with a fully-connected Trans-former. Based on a batch of linkless subgraphs sampled from the original graph data, Graph-Bert (Zhang et al, 2020a) learns the representations of the tar-get node with the extended graph-transformer layers effectively. Graphormer (Ying et al, 2021) is also built upon the standard Transformer architecture for graph representation learning tasks. For the graph-level tasks, the positional encodings in Graphormer are three novel graph structural encodings including centrality encoding, spatial encoding, and edge encoding (Ying et al, 2021). Some research studies have explored graph representation learning using special mask mechanisms or higher-order Transformers. GTA (Seo et al, 2021) affords the advantages of both graph and sequence representations by encour-aging the graph neural network characteristics of the transformer architecture. In addition, GTA takes the distance matrix of a molecular graph and atom-mapping matrix as mask self-attention and cross-attention. UniMP (Shi et al, 2021b) incorporates feature and label propagation at both training and infer-ence time, taking feature embedding and masked label embedding as input Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 34 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

information for propagation. Adopting the kernel attention approach to com-pute the pairwise weights, HOT (Kim et al, 2021b) generalizes Transformers to any-order permutation invariant data involving sets, graphs, and hypergraphs. 

## 7.2 GNN Transformers 

Only utilizing the self-attention mechanism to all nodes of the input graph, Standard Transformers usually ignore the information about the neighborhood structure of the nodes (Nguyen et al, 2019). To overcome this limitation, GNN Transformers consist of Transformer layers with GNN layers. The GNN layer in GNN Transformers is usually serial (before or after) with the Transformer layer, as shown in Figure 18. 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澻濦濕濤濜澔 濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澻濂濂 澻濂濂 澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澻濦濕濤濜澔 濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澻濂濂 澻濂濂 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澻濦濕濤濜澔 濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澻濂濂 澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澽濢濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛 澻濦濕濤濜澔 濈濦濕濢濧濚濣濦濡濙濦 澻濂濂 濃濩濨濤濩濨澔澹濡濖濙濘濘濝濢濛  

> Fig. 18 The architecture of GNN Transformers. They can be seen as a combination of Graph Transformer and GNN.

GraphFormers is a novel GNN Transformers architecture, where layerwise GNN components are nested alongside the Transformer blocks (Yang et al, 2021a). UGformer (Nguyen et al, 2019) presents two graph transformer vari-ants leveraging the transformer on a set of sampled neighbors or all input nodes. HGT (Hu et al, 2020b) designs the heterogeneous mini-batch graph sampling algorithm for Web-scale heterogeneous graphs. To model heterogene-ity, HGT designs node- and edge-type dependent parameters to characterize the heterogeneous attention over each edge, and maintain dedicated repre-sentations for different types of nodes and edges. To deliver a class of more expressive encoders of molecules, GROVER (Rong et al, 2020) introduces the message-passing mechanism into the Transformer architecture. In an end-to-end fashion, GTN (Yun et al, 2019) learns to transform a het-erogeneous input graph into useful meta-path graphs for each task and learns node representation on the graphs. The Transformer layer in GTN learns a soft selection of edge types and composite relations for generating useful multi-hop Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 35 connections so-called meta-paths (Yun et al, 2019). To tackle the limitation of existing graph pooling methods, GMT (Baek et al, 2021) formulates the graph pooling problem as a multiset encoding problem with auxiliary information about the graph structure. The Transformer model on graphs is more suitable for molecular graph tasks, molecular graph classification (Nguyen et al, 2019), molecular prop-erty prediction (Chen et al, 2019), and retrosynthesis tasks (Seo et al, 2021). Recently, graph transformers also stand out in other application scenarios, such as NLP (Cai and Lam, 2020; Koncel-Kedziorski et al, 2019), recommender systems (Xia et al, 2021b), knowledge graphs (Ahmad et al, 2021), and brain connections (Kim et al, 2021a). 

# 8 Comparison and Discussion 

In this section, a model characteristics table is provided for a more comprehen-sive comparison. Each kind of model is characterized from nine perspectives, including local attention, high-order, global attention, multi-space, path-aware, edge-types, topology, times, and prior knowledge. In Table 4, ✓ indicates that most models in the subclass have the corresponding characteristic. ”local atten-tion”, ”high-order” and ”global attention” correspond to the information from neighborhoods that different models can obtain. ”Multi-space” refers to the methods that adaptively select features from different feature spaces, resulting in a more robust latent representation. By considering the topological informa-tion of the graph, such as path, edge types, and topology, the model can learn a better representation that is more helpful for downstream tasks. These mod-els are characterized by ”path-aware”, ”edge-types” and ”topology”; Time is also an important property when learning the representation of nodes, espe-cially in dynamic graphs and time series. This kind of model is characterized by ”time”; ”prior knowledge” refers to the models that add prior knowledge in the process of graph representation learning. GRANs introduce RNN into graph representation learning, but at the same time, it is also limited by the inherent constraints of RNN (Liao et al, 2019). The original RNN architecture can only capture long-term dependencies on the ordered sequence, i.e. the output from one step will be used as input to the next step (Li et al, 2016). However, the neighbors of the central node are disordered in graphs (Hamilton et al, 2017). Although some methods deal with this problem by defining the order of nodes in advance (Hamilton et al, 2017), different arrangement orders may result in different performances. On the other hand, GRU-Attention and LSTM-Attention are both based on local attention, which focuses on immediate neighbors. It is difficult to obtain information from distant neighbors. To learn long-range patterns in graphs, GeniePath (Liu et al, 2019b) introduces skip connections. Some models in GRU-Attention take into account the edge type of node pair (Liao et al, 2019; Ruiz et al, 2020), while LSTM-Attention models prefer path-based random walks (Lee et al, 2018; Liu et al, 2019b). Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 36 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

> Table 4  Characteristics of different models in subclasses from nine perspectives.
> Stages  Subclasses  Local  High Order  Global  Multi Space  Path  Edge Types  Topology  Time  Prior GRANs GRU-Attention  ✓ ✓
> LSTM-Attention  ✓ ✓
> Intra-Layer GATs Neighbor Attention  ✓
> High-Order Attention  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
> Relation-Aware Attention  ✓ ✓ ✓
> Hierarchical Attention  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
> Attention Sampling/Pooling  ✓ ✓
> Hyper-Attention  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
> Inter-Layer GATs Multi-Level Attention  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
> Multi-Channel Attention  ✓ ✓
> Multi-View Attention  ✓ ✓
> Spatio-Temporal Attention  ✓ ✓ ✓
> Time Series Attention  ✓ ✓ ✓
> Graph Transformers Standard Transformers  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
> GNN Transformers  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓

Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 37 Compared with GRANs, GATs can be calculated in parallel with the attention mechanism, because there is no need for sequential calculation. The attention mechanisms of GATs allow for dealing with variable-sized inputs, focusing on the most relevant parts of the input (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018). Almost all models in intra-layer GATs aggregate and update the representation of nodes in defined local neighborhoods with local attention. GATs with local attention (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018; Wang et al, 2019a; Zhang and Xie, 2020; Kim and Oh, 2021; Brody et al, 2021) enable specifying different weights to different nodes in the local neighborhood. However, GAT (Veliˇ ckovi´ c et al, 2018) also suffers from over-fitting and over-smoothing (Wang et al, 2019a). To address the above weaknesses, C-GAT improves GAT via margin-based constraints on attention during training (Wang et al, 2019a). To make a clear understanding of the discriminative capacities of GAT, CPA presents a theoretical analysis of the representational properties of the attention-based GNNs (Zhang and Xie, 2020). Considering the attribute homophily rate, DMP specifies every attribute propagation weight on each edge in graphs with heterophily (Yang et al, 2021b). To enable embeddings with much smaller distortion beyond Euclidean space, hyperbolic GATs (Chami et al, 2019; Zhang and Gao, 2021; Zhang et al, 2021d) learn embeddings that preserve hierarchical structure in hyperbolic space. Unfortunately, It is difficult for these methods to directly obtain information from distant neighbors. To alleviate this limitation, GATs with high-order attention attempt to obtain information from distant neigh-bors through path-aware strategies (Yang et al, 2019; Cao et al, 2020; Yang et al, 2021d). To preserve the hierarchy in the graph topology, hierarchical attention defines two or more levels of attention mechanisms. Low-level atten-tion is based on the node, while high-level attention can be based on paths (Yang et al, 2021e), relations (Zhang et al, 2020c), or groups (Lin et al, 2022). In such a case, hierarchical attention can learn specific hierarchical features of the graph. For graph classification, attention-based pooling (Huang et al, 2019a; Lee et al, 2019a) can learn hierarchical representations based on the attention mechanism. To apply GATs to complex graphs with multiple edge types, models with relation-aware attention usually define different relation-ships based on edge types (Huang et al, 2019b; Hong et al, 2020; Qin et al, 2021b). While many complex graphs consist of relationships beyond pair-wise interactions, i.e., hyperedge that connects more than two nodes (Zhang et al, 2020b). Models with hyper-attention are designed for hypergraphs to extract patterns among higher-order interactions (Zhang et al, 2021a). Different from intra-layer GATs, inter-layer GATs extract useful hidden representations from different feature spaces via feature fusion attention, not just local neighborhoods. However, the performance of attention-based GNNs decreases when going deeper. Several recent studies attribute this performance deterioration to the entanglement of representation transformation and prop-agation in GNNs (Liu et al, 2020). After decoupling these two operations, deeper GNNs can be used to learn node representations from larger receptive Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 38 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

fields (Liu et al, 2020; Zhang et al, 2022c). Then, multi-level attention adap-tively fuses the representation of different-order neighbors to obtain high-order information. Similarly, multi-channel attention can distinguish signals with different frequencies during message passing (Bo et al, 2021). To obtain the representations from different feature spaces, models with multi-view atten-tion first construct several graphs with different topological structures based on the original graph and then fuse the representations of different views to obtain the final representation (Yang et al, 2021e; Tao et al, 2020). However, the above GATs ignore the graph with the time attribute. Spatio-Temporal attention and time-series attention can handle data with time attributes, such as dynamic graphs (Sankar et al, 2018; Fathy and Li, 2020; Xu et al, 2020) and time series (Shukla and Marlin, 2021; Zhang et al, 2021c). Especially, time-series attention should first construct the graph structure from the time-series data. With the advent of Graph Transformers, GNNs do not need to obtain distant messages by stacking network layers. Graph Transformers can directly propagate the information among the nodes in the whole graph with global attention. Standard Transformers in graphs generate the position encoding with path-aware (Ying et al, 2021), edge-types (Dwivedi and Bresson, 2020), or additional attributes (Kreuzer et al, 2021; Zhang et al, 2020a). This kind of models are outstanding on the small molecular graph. However, Standard Transformers do not consider the original graph structure during training. To make up for this shortcoming, GNN Transformers jointly train the GNN layers and Transformers layers (Zhang et al, 2020a). This combination of models can effectively compensate for the shortcomings of the above single model. Further, we can capture both local and global information through a combination of local and global attention, which is difficult to achieve with a single model. In addition, it is also a good choice for the combination model of different attention, which can be of the same type Choi (2022); Kim and Oh (2021) or different types (Zhang et al, 2020c; Yang et al, 2021e; Zheng et al, 2020). This combination may make up for the deficiency of a single model, thus improving the expression ability of the model. For example, SuperGAT takes advantage of different attention operations to learn label agreement and edge presence (Kim and Oh, 2021). Typically, methods with hierarchical attention tend to include two and more attention mechanisms, which can capture different lev-els of semantic information. The hierarchical attention mechanism utilizes the neighborhood information of an entity more effectively from different levels (Zhang et al, 2020c). For HAN in heterogeneous graphs, the node-level atten-tion aims to learn the importance between a node and its neighbors along the meta-path, while the semantic-level attention can learn the importance of dif-ferent meta-paths (Wang et al, 2019d). More complexly, GMAN (Zheng et al, 2020) proposes a graph multi-attention network for long-term traffic predic-tion, which includes spatial attention, temporal attention, and gated fusion. However, the simultaneous use of multiple attention mechanisms in the same model will also significantly increase the computational complexity. In short, Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 39 it is difficult to adapt any model to all scenarios. We hope to help researchers better design their attention-based GNNs. To the best of our knowledge, it is difficult to quantitatively compare and analyze the complexity of different models, especially when different model structures and different attention mechanisms are involved. Therefore, we provide a general analysis of three basic attention-based GNNs. The time complexity of GRANs is high due to their recursive nature. The updating of node representations needs to consider the representations of their neighboring nodes at each time step, and this process requires multiple iterations over time steps. GATs have a high time complexity because they leverage self-attention mechanisms to compute attention weights between nodes. This node-to-node attentional computation increases the space-time complexity. The attention weights can be computed in parallel, which can help to reduce the time com-plexity but increases the space complexity at the same time. In addition, the scale of graphs continues to grow exponentially over time in real life. This will be a huge challenge for GATs, as well as for GRANs and Graph Transformers. Graph Transformers, based on the Transformer model, involve self-attention and multi-head self-attention in neural network layers. The attention mecha-nism in Graph Transformers can be seen as a fully connected GAT, and we can imagine that its complexity is usually much higher than that of GAT. The actual time complexity depends on factors such as the specific model architecture, graph size, sparsity, and available computational resources. 

# 9 Open Issues and Future Directions 

## 9.1 Scalability 

Scalability is a major challenge for the application of attention-based GNNs in practical scenarios. Although there are some open source medium or large-scale graph datasets in OGB (Hu et al, 2020a), most of the existing studies focus on testing the new developed attention-based GNNs on small graphs (e.g., some citation network datasets with only a few thousand nodes such as Cora and Citeseer (Welling and Kipf, 2016)), while ignoring the huge, complex and noisy networks in practical applications. Large-scale graph data has been a huge challenge for attention-based GNNs. The most fundamental reason for this phenomenon in attention-based GNNs is the high computational complexity of the attention mechanism. Attention-based GNNs are hard to implement in large graphs, especially for Graph Transformers. Up to now, although some approaches have attempted to improve model efficiency through sampling and subgraphs (Zhang et al, 2020a; Nguyen et al, 2019; Hu et al, 2020b), they still can not efficiently process large graphs. 

## 9.2 Interpretability 

Though attention-based GNNs achieve promising performance on various tasks, a clear understanding of their discriminative power is superficial (Zhang Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 40 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

and Xie, 2020). Without understanding the relationships behind the predic-tions, these models can not be understood and fully trusted (Yuan et al, 2021a). Recent works (Xu et al, 2018a; Maron et al, 2019) attempt to explore the inter-pretability of graph neural networks and theoretically analyze the expressive power of GNNs. To improve the performance of attention-based GNNs, CPA (Zhang and Xie, 2020) improves the attention mechanism in GNNs via cardi-nality preservation and presents a theoretical analysis of the representational properties of attention-based GNNs. HAGERec proposes a hierarchical atten-tion graph convolutional network to explore users’ potential preferences from the high-order connectivity structure (Yang and Dong, 2020). Considering the topology of the graph, some researches are carried out from the perspective of motifs (Peng et al, 2020) and subgraph (Yuan et al, 2021a). However, there is still a lot of room for the interpretability of attention-based GNNs (Yuan et al, 2020). 

## 9.3 Deeper Models 

Like traditional GNNs, most attention-based GNNs aggregate messages from local neighbors iteratively, ignoring messages from the distant neighborhood. When the downstream task depends on long-range interaction, GNNs fail to propagate messages originating from distant neighborhoods and perform poorly. Although they can obtain distant messages by stacking the neural net-work layers, this also brings about the over-smoothing (Li et al, 2018), i.e., node representations become indistinguishable. To improve expressive capability and alleviate the over-smoothing of attention-based GNNs, some researchers focus on the topological properties of graphs (Zhang and Xie, 2020; Yang et al, 2021b). Focus on the architecture of GNNs, decoupling representation trans-formation and message propagation enable deeper GNNs with attention to learning graph node representations from larger receptive fields (Liu et al, 2020; Zhang et al, 2022c). As the number of layers increases, the receptive field of a node grows exponentially. This causes over-squashing (Alon and Yahav, 2020), where information from the exponentially-growing receptive field is compressed into fixed-length node vectors. Compared with GCNs, GATs can effectively alleviate the over-squashing phenomenon by introducing an attention mecha-nism (Alon and Yahav, 2020). However, when stacking too many layers, GATs also suffer from higher complexity. Instead, Graph Transformers (Zhang et al, 2020a; Nguyen et al, 2019) obtain global information in a network layer, which is a breakthrough to alleviate the problem of over-squashing. In recent years, many researchers explore the above problems from the perspective of higher-order structures (Kim et al, 2021b; Battiston et al, 2021), such as hypergraphs and simplicial complexes. 

## 9.4 Complex Graph 

Graph-structured data is ubiquitous in our daily life, such as social networks, citation networks, and collaboration networks. In the real-world, however, Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 41 graphs can be both structurally large and complex (Lee et al, 2019b). In addi-tion to the above graph-structured data often used in scientific research, there are many more complex graph scenarios with a large amount of semantic information used in industry, such as transportation networks (Zheng et al, 2020), knowledge graphs (Wang et al, 2019c), and chemical molecule graphs (Chen et al, 2019). These real-world networks are usually modeled as homo-geneous graphs (Wang et al, 2022), relation-aware graphs (Qin et al, 2021b), or dynamic graphs (Zhu et al, 2022). However, in the case of heterogeneous graphs, attention-based GNNs require specific modifications to effectively inte-grate and combine the semantic information across nodes, edges, and graphs. For dynamic graphs with time attributes, the graph structure evolves with time, which increases the difficulty of attention-based GNNs training. There-fore, how to design a more universal attention-based GNN, friendly to graphs with different complex attributes, is still an open problem. 

## 9.5 Novel Applications 

Attention-based GNNs are widely used in social networks , natural language processing , recommendation systems , and traffic forecasting . In CV that seems to be unrelated to the graph, attention-based GNNs have also begun to be widely applied by generating graphs . Attention-based GNNs are widely used in social networks (Su et al, 2022), natural language processing (Wu et al, 2021b), recommendation systems (Wu et al, 2020a), traffic forecasting (Jiang and Luo, 2021), and multimodal (Ektefaie et al, 2023). In CV that seems to be unrelated to the graph, attention-based GNNs have also begun to be widely applied by generating graphs (Xu et al, 2022). Similarly, we can model segment-wise speaker embeddings (SSEs) as nodes of a graph (Jung et al, 2021b). Further, GNNs could model interactions both within and across different data types in multimodal data, including image, video, language, and knowledge graph. Once complex relations between modalities can be built into a network structure, GNNs provide a powerful and flexible strategy to leverage interdependencies in multimodal datasets (Ektefaie et al, 2023). Combinato-rial optimization is a canonical NP-hard problem in traditional operations research. GNN as a scalable general-purpose solver is adopted to approximately solve combinatorial optimization problems (Schuetz et al, 2022). In the field of biochemistry, GNNs also show unique advantages, especially in generating molecular graphs (St¨ ark et al, 2021). It can be seen that attention-based GNNs have good application prospects. There are still many new fields waiting for us to explore, especially in scenes that can be modeled with graphs. 

# 10 Conclusion 

Over the past decade, the attention mechanism has achieved impressive performance in NLP and CV. Attention-based GNNs allow us to adap-tively aggregate and update representations from the different neighborhoods with local or global attention, even feature fusion attention. In this survey, Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 42 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

we provide a comprehensive review of the most recent research efforts on attention-based GNNs. We first give some basic definitions of attention-based GNNs including graph, graph neural networks, and attention mechanisms. Then, we propose a novel two-level taxonomy for attention-based GNNs from the perspective of development history and architectural perspectives. To be specific, we classify existing attention-based GNNs into three stages and then organize them into several sub-categories in each stage according to the model architecture. For each sub-category, we briefly clarify the main characteris-tics, detail the attention strategies adopted by the representative models, and discuss their advantages and limitations. Furthermore, we outline some open issues and promising future research directions to advance this field. Finally, we intend to share the relevant latest papers about attention-based GNNs at the open resources. We hope this survey will provide a succinct introduction to attention-based GNNs and shed some light on future developments. 

# Appendix 

For ease of reading, we summarize the abbreviations of the methods and their corresponding full names in Table 5. 

Table 5 Abbreviations of the methods and their corresponding full names. Abbreviation Full Name SpectralCNN Spectral Convolutional Neural Networks ChebNet Graph CNN with Chebyshev Filter GCN Graph Convolutional Networks MPNN Message-Passing Neural Networks GraphNet Graph Networks GAT Graph Attention Networks C-GAT Constrained Graph Attention Networks SuperGAT Self-supervised Graph Attention Network GRU Gated Recurrent Units GGNN Gated Graph Sequence Neural Networks GRNN Graph Recurrent Neural Networks GSP graph signal processing GaAN Gated Attention Networks GRAN Graph Recurrent Attention Networks GraphSAGE Graph SAmple and aggreGatE LSTM Long Short-Term Memory JK-Net Jumping Knowledge Networks GAM Graph Attention Model DMP Diverse Message Passing PPRGAT Personalized PageRank GAT 

> continued on next page

Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 43 

> continued from previous page

GANet Graph Attention Networks CAT Conjoint Attention Networks MSNA MultiSpace Neighbor Attention CPA Cardinality Preserved Attention AGNN Attention-based Graph Neural Network HTNE Hawkes process based Temporal Network Embedding HAT Hyperbolic Graph Attention Network HGCN Hyperbolic Graph Convolutional Neural Network Hype-HAN Hy-perbolic Hierarchical Attention Network SPAGAN Shortest Path Graph Attention Network PaGNN Path-aware Graph Neural Network ADSF Adaptive Structural Fingerprint MAGNA Multi-hop Attention Graph Neural Networks T-GAP Temporal Knowledge Graph with Attention Propagation SiGAT Signed Graph Attention Networks SNEA Signed Network Embedding via Graph Attention RGAT Relational Graph Attention Networks HetSANN Heterogeneous Graph Structural Attention Neural Network WRGAT Weighted Relational GAT EAGCN Edge Attention-based Multi-Relational GCN TALP Type-Aware Anchor Link Prediction KGAT Knowledge Graph Attention Network GATE Graph Attention Transformer Encoder RelGNN Relation-aware GNN CGAT Channel-aware Graph Attention Network PSHGAN Meta-path and meta-structure integrated heterogeneous graph neural network through attention mechanisms PRML Path-based Proximity Ranking Metric Dual-Level Attention Learning RGHAT Relational Graph neural network with Hierarchical ATtention LAN Logic Attention Network GraphHAM Graph embedding model with Hierarchical Attentive Memberships GAW Graph Attention model with random Walk NLGAT Non-Local GAT DiffPool Differentiable Graph Pooling SAGPool Self-Attention Graph Pooling AttPool graph pooling module based on an attention based mechanism ChebyGIN Combining GIN with ChebyNet DAGNN Deep Adaptive Graph Neural Network TDGNN Tree Decomposed Graph Neural Network FAGCN Frequency Adaptation Graph Convolutional Networks 

> continued on next page

Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 44 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

> continued from previous page

ACM Adaptive Channel Mixing AM-GCN Adaptive Multi-channel GCN UAG Uncertainty-aware Attention Graph Neural Network MV-GCN Multi-View Graph Convolutional Netowork GENet Graph Ensemble Network MVE Multi-View Network Representation Learning MGAT Multi-view Graph Attention Networks DySAT Dynamic Self-Attention Network TemporalGAT Temporal-GAT GAEN Graph Attention Evolving Networks MMDNE Network Embedding with Micro- and Macro-Dynamics TGAT Temporal Graph Attention MTAD-GAT Multivariate Time-series Anomaly Detection via Graph Attention Network GACNN Graph Attention Convolutional Neural Network Hyper-SAGNN Self-Attention based Graph Neural Network for Hypergraphs HHGR Hierarchical Hypergraph Learning Framework for Group Recommendation HyperTeNet Hypergraph and Transformer-based Neural Network Hyper-GAT Hypergraph-GAT PAGAT Path-Augmented Graph Transformer Networks GT Graph Transformer SAN Spectral Attention Network GTA Graph Truncated Attention UniMP Unified Message Passaging Model HOT Higher-Order Transformer GraphFormers GNN-nested Transformers UGformer Universal Graph Transformer HGT Heterogeneous Graph Transformer GROVER Graph Representation frOm self-superVised mEssage passing tRansformer GTN Graph Transformer Networks GMT Graph Multi-set Transformer OGB Open Graph Benchmark 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.61876186) and the Xuzhou Science and Technology Project (No.KC21300). Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 45 

# References 

Abu-El-Haija S, Perozzi B, Al-Rfou R, et al (2018) Watch your step: Learn-ing node embeddings via graph attention. Advances in neural information processing systems 31 Ahmad WU, Peng N, Chang KW (2021) Gate: graph attention transformer encoder for cross-lingual relation and event extraction. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 12,462–12,470 Alon U, Yahav E (2020) On the bottleneck of graph neural networks and its practical implications. arXiv preprint arXiv:200605205 Baek J, Kang M, Hwang SJ (2021) Accurate learning of graph representa-tions with graph multiset pooling. In: The Ninth International Conference on Learning Representations, The International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) Bai S, Zhang F, Torr PH (2021) Hypergraph convolution and hypergraph attention. Pattern Recognition 110:107,637 Battaglia PW, Hamrick JB, Bapst V, et al (2018) Relational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:180601261 Battiston F, Amico E, Barrat A, et al (2021) The physics of higher-order interactions in complex systems. Nature Physics 17(10):1093–1098 Bo D, Wang X, Shi C, et al (2021) Beyond low-frequency information in graph convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 3950–3957 Brauwers G, Frasincar F (2021) A general survey on attention mechanisms in deep learning. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering Brody S, Alon U, Yahav E (2021) How attentive are graph attention networks? In: International Conference on Learning Representations Bruna J, Zaremba W, Szlam A, et al (2014) Spectral networks and locally connected networks on graphs. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR2014), CBLS, April 2014, pp http–openreview Busbridge D, Sherburn D, Cavallo P, et al (2019) Relational graph attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:190405811 Cai D, Lam W (2020) Graph transformer for graph-to-sequence learning. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp 7464–7471 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 46 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Cao M, Ma X, Zhu K, et al (2020) Heterogeneous information network embed-ding with convolutional graph attention networks. In: 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, pp 1–8 Cen Y, Zou X, Zhang J, et al (2019) Representation learning for attributed multiplex heterogeneous network. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp 1358–1368 Chami I, Ying Z, R´ e C, et al (2019) Hyperbolic graph convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 Chaudhari S, Mithal V, Polatkan G, et al (2021) An attentive survey of attention models. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 12(5):1–32 Chen B, Barzilay R, Jaakkola T (2019) Path-augmented graph transformer network. arXiv preprint arXiv:190512712 Cheng R, Li Q (2021) Modeling the momentum spillover effect for stock pre-diction via attribute-driven graph attention networks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 55–62 Choi E, Bahadori MT, Song L, et al (2017) Gram: graph-based attention model for healthcare representation learning. In: Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 787–795 Choi J (2022) Personalized pagerank graph attention networks. In: ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, pp 3578–3582 Cini A, Marisca I, Bianchi FM, et al (2022) Scalable spatiotemporal graph neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:220906520 Defferrard M, Bresson X, Vandergheynst P (2016) Convolutional neural net-works on graphs with fast localized spectral filtering. Advances in neural information processing systems 29 Dwivedi VP, Bresson X (2020) A generalization of transformer networks to graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:201209699 Ektefaie Y, Dasoulas G, Noori A, et al (2023) Multimodal learning with graphs. Nature Machine Intelligence pp 1–11 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 47 Fang X, Huang J, Wang F, et al (2020) Constgat: Contextual spatial-temporal graph attention network for travel time estimation at baidu maps. In: Pro-ceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp 2697–2705 Fathy A, Li K (2020) Temporalgat: attention-based dynamic graph represen-tation learning. In: Pacific-Asia Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Springer, pp 413–423 Feng B, Wang Y, Ding Y (2021) Uag: Uncertainty-aware attention graph neu-ral network for defending adversarial attacks. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 7404–7412 Gao C, Wang X, He X, et al (2022) Graph neural networks for recommender system. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp 1623–1625 Gao H, Ji S (2019) Graph representation learning via hard and channel-wise attention networks. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp 741–749 Georgousis S, Kenning MP, Xie X (2021) Graph deep learning: State of the art and challenges. IEEE Access 9:22,106–22,140 Gilmer J, Schoenholz SS, Riley PF, et al (2017) Neural message passing for quantum chemistry. In: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp 1263–1272 Grover A, Leskovec J (2016) node2vec: Scalable feature learning for networks. In: Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 855–864 Gulcehre C, Denil M, Malinowski M, et al (2018) Hyperbolic attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:180509786 Guo MH, Xu TX, Liu JJ, et al (2022) Attention mechanisms in computer vision: A survey. Computational Visual Media pp 1–38 Guo S, Lin Y, Feng N, et al (2019) Attention based spatial-temporal graph convolutional networks for traffic flow forecasting. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp 922–929 Hamilton W, Ying Z, Leskovec J (2017) Inductive representation learning on large graphs. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 He S, Shin KG (2020) Towards fine-grained flow forecasting: A graph attention approach for bike sharing systems. In: Proceedings of The Web Conference Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 48 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

2020, pp 88–98 He T, Ong YS, Bai L (2021) Learning conjoint attentions for graph neural nets. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:2641–2653 Hong H, Guo H, Lin Y, et al (2020) An attention-based graph neural net-work for heterogeneous structural learning. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp 4132–4139 Hu W, Fey M, Zitnik M, et al (2020a) Open graph benchmark: Datasets for machine learning on graphs. Advances in neural information processing systems 33:22,118–22,133 Hu Z, Dong Y, Wang K, et al (2020b) Heterogeneous graph transformer. In: Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp 2704–2710 Huang B, Carley KM (2019) Syntax-aware aspect level sentiment clas-sification with graph attention networks. In: Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pp 5469–5477 Huang J, Li Z, Li N, et al (2019a) Attpool: Towards hierarchical feature representation in graph convolutional networks via attention mechanism. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp 6480–6489 Huang J, Shen H, Hou L, et al (2019b) Signed graph attention networks. In: International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks, Springer, pp 566–577 Jiang W, Luo J (2021) Graph neural network for traffic forecasting: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:210111174 Jung J, Jung J, Kang U (2021a) Learning to walk across time for interpretable temporal knowledge graph completion. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp 786–795 Jung Jw, Heo HS, Yu HJ, et al (2021b) Graph attention networks for speaker verification. In: ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, pp 6149–6153 Kazemi SM, Goel R, Jain K, et al (2020) Representation learning for dynamic graphs: A survey. J Mach Learn Res 21(70):1–73 Kim BH, Ye JC, Kim JJ (2021a) Learning dynamic graph representation of brain connectome with spatio-temporal attention. Advances in Neural Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 49 Information Processing Systems 34:4314–4327 Kim D, Oh AH (2021) How to find your friendly neighborhood: Graph atten-tion design with self-supervision. In: The Ninth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2021), International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2021) Kim J, Oh S, Hong S (2021b) Transformers generalize deepsets and can be extended to graphs & hypergraphs. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:28,016–28,028 Kim J, Yoon S, Kim D, et al (2021c) Structured co-reference graph attention for video-grounded dialogue. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 1789–1797 Klicpera J, Bojchevski A, G¨ unnemann S (2018) Predict then propa-gate: Graph neural networks meet personalized pagerank. arXiv preprint arXiv:181005997 Klicpera J, Weißenberger S, G¨ unnemann S (2019) Diffusion improves graph learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:191105485 Knyazev B, Taylor GW, Amer M (2019) Understanding attention and general-ization in graph neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 Koncel-Kedziorski R, Bekal D, Luan Y, et al (2019) Text generation from knowledge graphs with graph transformers. In: 2019 Annual Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp 2284–2293 Kreuzer D, Beaini D, Hamilton W, et al (2021) Rethinking graph transformers with spectral attention. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:21,618–21,629 Lee J, Lee I, Kang J (2019a) Self-attention graph pooling. In: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp 3734–3743 Lee JB, Rossi R, Kong X (2018) Graph classification using structural attention. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp 1666–1674 Lee JB, Rossi RA, Kim S, et al (2019b) Attention models in graphs: A survey. ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 13(6):1–25 Li J, Liu X, Zong Z, et al (2020a) Graph attention based proposal 3d convnets for action detection. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 50 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Intelligence, pp 4626–4633 Li L, Gan Z, Cheng Y, et al (2019) Relation-aware graph attention network for visual question answering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, pp 10,313–10,322 Li Q, Han Z, Wu XM (2018) Deeper insights into graph convolutional net-works for semi-supervised learning. In: 32nd AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2018, AAAI press, pp 3538–3545 Li X, Shang Y, Cao Y, et al (2020b) Type-aware anchor link prediction across heterogeneous networks based on graph attention network. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 147–155 Li Y, Zemel R, Brockschmidt M, et al (2016) Gated graph sequence neural networks. In: Proceedings of ICLR’16 Li Y, Tian Y, Zhang J, et al (2020c) Learning signed network embedding via graph attention. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 4772–4779 Liang Y, Ke S, Zhang J, et al (2018) Geoman: Multi-level attention networks for geo-sensory time series prediction. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp 3428–3434 Liao R, Li Y, Song Y, et al (2019) Efficient graph generation with graph recur-rent attention networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 Lin L, Wang H (2020) Graph attention networks over edge content-based chan-nels. In: proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp 1819–1827 Lin L, Blaser E, Wang H (2022) Graph embedding with hierarchical attentive membership. In: Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, pp 582–590 Lin T, Wang Y, Liu X, et al (2021) A survey of transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:210604554 Liu M, Gao H, Ji S (2020) Towards deeper graph neural networks. In: Pro-ceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp 338–348 Liu M, Wang Z, Ji S (2021) Non-local graph neural networks. IEEE Transac-tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 51 Liu S, Chen Z, Liu H, et al (2019a) User-video co-attention network for person-alized micro-video recommendation. In: The World Wide Web Conference, pp 3020–3026 Liu Z, Chen C, Li L, et al (2019b) Geniepath: Graph neural networks with adaptive receptive paths. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 4424–4431 Long Y, Wu M, Liu Y, et al (2021) Graph contextualized attention network for predicting synthetic lethality in human cancers. Bioinformatics 37(16):2432– 2440 Lu Y, Wang X, Shi C, et al (2019) Temporal network embedding with micro-and macro-dynamics. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on information and knowledge management, pp 469–478 Luan S, Hua C, Lu Q, et al (2021) Is heterophily a real nightmare for graph neural networks to do node classification? arXiv preprint arXiv:210905641 Lv Q, Ding M, Liu Q, et al (2021) Are we really making much progress? revis-iting, benchmarking and refining heterogeneous graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp 1150–1160 Ma N, Mazumder S, Wang H, et al (2020) Entity-aware dependency-based deep graph attention network for comparative preference classification. In: Pro-ceedings of Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL-2020) Maron H, Ben-Hamu H, Serviansky H, et al (2019) Provably powerful graph networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 Mei G, Pan L, Liu S (2022) Heterogeneous graph embedding by aggregating meta-path and meta-structure through attention mechanism. Neurocomput-ing 468:276–285 Min E, Chen R, Bian Y, et al (2022) Transformer for graphs: An overview from architecture perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:220208455 Mou C, Zhang J, Wu Z (2021) Dynamic attentive graph learning for image restoration. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp 4328–4337 Nathani D, Chauhan J, Sharma C, et al (2019) Learning attention-based embeddings for relation prediction in knowledge graphs. In: Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 4710–4723 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 52 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Nguyen DQ, Nguyen TD, Phung D (2019) Universal graph transformer self-attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:190911855 Peng H, Li J, Gong Q, et al (2020) Motif-matching based subgraph-level atten-tional convolutional network for graph classification. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp 5387–5394 Perozzi B, Al-Rfou R, Skiena S (2014) Deepwalk: Online learning of social representations. In: Proceedings of the 20th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, pp 701–710 Phuong M, Hutter M (2022) Formal algorithms for transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:220709238 Qin L, Li Z, Che W, et al (2021a) Co-gat: A co-interactive graph atten-tion network for joint dialog act recognition and sentiment classification. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 13,709–13,717 Qin X, Sheikh N, Reinwald B, et al (2021b) Relation-aware graph attention model with adaptive self-adversarial training. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 9368–9376 Qu M, Tang J, Shang J, et al (2017) An attention-based collaboration frame-work for multi-view network representation learning. In: Proceedings of the 2017 ACM on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, pp 1767–1776 Rong Y, Huang W, Xu T, et al (2019) Dropedge: Towards deep graph con-volutional networks on node classification. In: International Conference on Learning Representations Rong Y, Bian Y, Xu T, et al (2020) Self-supervised graph transformer on large-scale molecular data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33:12,559–12,571 Roweis ST, Saul LK (2000) Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding. science 290(5500):2323–2326 Ruiz L, Gama F, Ribeiro A (2020) Gated graph recurrent neural networks. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing 68:6303–6318 Sankar A, Wu Y, Gou L, et al (2018) Dynamic graph representation learning via self-attention networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:181209430 Scarselli F, Gori M, Tsoi AC, et al (2008) The graph neural network model. IEEE transactions on neural networks 20(1):61–80 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 53 Schuetz MJ, Brubaker JK, Katzgraber HG (2022) Combinatorial optimization with physics-inspired graph neural networks. Nature Machine Intelligence 4(4):367–377 Seo SW, Song YY, Yang JY, et al (2021) Gta: Graph truncated attention for retrosynthesis. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 531–539 Shang C, Liu Q, Chen KS, et al (2018) Edge attention-based multi-relational graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:180204944 Shi M, Huang Y, Zhu X, et al (2021a) Gaen: Graph attention evolving net-works. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp 1541–1547 Shi Y, Huang Z, Feng S, et al (2021b) Masked label prediction: Unified mes-sage passing model for semi-supervised classification. In: Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2021, Virtual Event / Montreal, Canada, 19-27 August 2021, pp 1548–1554 Shukla SN, Marlin BM (2021) Multi-time attention networks for irregularly sampled time series. arXiv preprint arXiv:210110318 Silva VF, Silva ME, Ribeiro P, et al (2021) Time series analysis via network science: Concepts and algorithms. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 11(3):e1404 Stachenfeld K, Godwin J, Battaglia P (2020) Graph networks with spectral message passing. arXiv preprint arXiv:210100079 St¨ ark H, Beaini D, Corso G, et al (2021) 3d infomax improves gnns for molecular property prediction. arXiv preprint arXiv:211004126 Su X, Xue S, Liu F, et al (2022) A comprehensive survey on community detection with deep learning. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems Sun Q, Liu H, He J, et al (2020) Dagc: Employing dual attention and graph convolution for point cloud based place recognition. In: Proceedings of the 2020 International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval, pp 224–232 Suresh S, Budde V, Neville J, et al (2021) Breaking the limit of graph neural networks by improving the assortativity of graphs with local mixing pat-terns. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, pp 1541–1551 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 54 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Tang H, Liang X, Wu B, et al (2021) Graph ensemble networks for semi-supervised embedding learning. In: International Conference on Knowledge Science, Engineering and Management, Springer, pp 408–420 Tang J, Qu M, Wang M, et al (2015) Line: Large-scale information network embedding. In: Proceedings of the 24th international conference on world wide web, pp 1067–1077 Tao Z, Wei Y, Wang X, et al (2020) Mgat: multimodal graph attention network for recommendation. Information Processing & Management 57(5):102,277 Tay Y, Dehghani M, Bahri D, et al (2020) Efficient transformers: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) Thekumparampil KK, Wang C, Oh S, et al (2018) Attention-based graph neural network for semi-supervised learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:180303735 Vaswani A, Shazeer N, Parmar N, et al (2017) Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 Veliˇ ckovi´ c P, Cucurull G, Casanova A, et al (2018) Graph attention networks. In: International Conference on Learning Representations Vijaikumar M, Hada D, Shevade S (2021) Hypertenet: Hypergraph and transformer-based neural network for personalized list continuation. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), IEEE, pp 1210–1215 Wang G, Ying R, Huang J, et al (2019a) Improving graph attention networks with large margin-based constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:191011945 Wang G, Ying R, Huang J, et al (2021) Multi-hop attention graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) Wang K, Shen W, Yang Y, et al (2020a) Relational graph attention network for aspect-based sentiment analysis. In: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp 3229–3238 Wang P, Han J, Li C, et al (2019b) Logic attention based neighborhood aggre-gation for inductive knowledge graph embedding. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 7152–7159 Wang X, He X, Cao Y, et al (2019c) Kgat: Knowledge graph attention net-work for recommendation. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp 950–958 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 55 Wang X, Ji H, Shi C, et al (2019d) Heterogeneous graph attention network. In: The world wide web conference, pp 2022–2032 Wang X, Zhu M, Bo D, et al (2020b) Am-gcn: Adaptive multi-channel graph convolutional networks. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Inter-national conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp 1243–1253 Wang X, Bo D, Shi C, et al (2022) A survey on heterogeneous graph embed-ding: methods, techniques, applications and sources. IEEE Transactions on Big Data Wang Y, Derr T (2021) Tree decomposed graph neural network. In: Proceed-ings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp 2040–2049 Wang Z, Lei Y, Li W (2020c) Neighborhood attention networks with adver-sarial learning for link prediction. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 32(8):3653–3663 Welling M, Kipf TN (2016) Semi-supervised classification with graph convolu-tional networks. In: J. International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2017) Wen Q, Zhou T, Zhang C, et al (2022) Transformers in time series: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:220207125 Wu F, Souza A, Zhang T, et al (2019a) Simplifying graph convolutional networks. In: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp 6861–6871 Wu J, Shi W, Cao X, et al (2021a) Disenkgat: knowledge graph embedding with disentangled graph attention network. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp 2140–2149 Wu L, Chen Y, Shen K, et al (2021b) Graph neural networks for natural language processing: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:210606090 Wu Q, Zhang H, Gao X, et al (2019b) Dual graph attention networks for deep latent representation of multifaceted social effects in recommender systems. In: The World Wide Web Conference, pp 2091–2102 Wu S, Sun F, Zhang W, et al (2020a) Graph neural networks in recommender systems: a survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) Wu Z, Pan S, Chen F, et al (2020b) A comprehensive survey on graph neu-ral networks. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 56 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

32(1):4–24 Xia F, Sun K, Yu S, et al (2021a) Graph learning: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence 2(2):109–127 Xia L, Huang C, Xu Y, et al (2021b) Knowledge-enhanced hierarchical graph transformer network for multi-behavior recommendation. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 4486–4493 Xie Y, Zhang Y, Gong M, et al (2020) Mgat: Multi-view graph attention networks. Neural Networks 132:180–189 Xu D, Ruan C, Korpeoglu E, et al (2020) Inductive representation learning on temporal graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:200207962 Xu K, Hu W, Leskovec J, et al (2018a) How powerful are graph neural networks? In: International Conference on Learning Representations Xu K, Li C, Tian Y, et al (2018b) Representation learning on graphs with jumping knowledge networks. In: International conference on machine learning, PMLR, pp 5453–5462 Xu X, Zu S, Gao C, et al (2018c) Modeling attention flow on graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:181100497 Xu Y, Wang L, Wang Y, et al (2022) Adaptive trajectory prediction via trans-ferable gnn. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 6520–6531 Yan S, Xiong Y, Lin D (2018) Spatial temporal graph convolutional networks for skeleton-based action recognition. In: Thirty-second AAAI conference on artificial intelligence Yang J, Liu Z, Xiao S, et al (2021a) Graphformers: Gnn-nested transformers for representation learning on textual graph. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:28,798–28,810 Yang L, Wu F, Gu J, et al (2020a) Graph attention topic modeling network. In: Proceedings of The Web Conference 2020, pp 144–154 Yang L, Li M, Liu L, et al (2021b) Diverse message passing for attribute with heterophily. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:4751– 4763 Yang M, Zhou M, Li Z, et al (2022a) Hyperbolic graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:220213852 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 57 Yang R, Shi J, Yang Y, et al (2021c) Effective and scalable clustering on massive attributed graphs. In: Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021, pp 3675–3687 Yang S, Hu B, Zhang Z, et al (2021d) Inductive link prediction with interactive structure learning on attributed graph. In: Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer, pp 383– 398 Yang T, Hu L, Shi C, et al (2021e) Hgat: Heterogeneous graph attention networks for semi-supervised short text classification. ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) 39(3):1–29 Yang Y, Wang X, Song M, et al (2019) Spagan: shortest path graph atten-tion network. In: Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 4099–4105 Yang Y, Qiu J, Song M, et al (2020b) Distilling knowledge from graph convolu-tional networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp 7074–7083 Yang Y, Jiao L, Liu X, et al (2022b) Transformers meet visual learning understanding: A comprehensive review. arXiv preprint arXiv:220312944 Yang Z, Dong S (2020) Hagerec: Hierarchical attention graph convolutional network incorporating knowledge graph for explainable recommendation. Knowledge-Based Systems 204:106,194 Ying C, Cai T, Luo S, et al (2021) Do transformers really perform badly for graph representation? Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34:28,877–28,888 Ying Z, You J, Morris C, et al (2018) Hierarchical graph representation learn-ing with differentiable pooling. Advances in neural information processing systems 31 Yuan H, Yu H, Gui S, et al (2020) Explainability in graph neural networks: A taxonomic survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:201215445 Yuan H, Yu H, Wang J, et al (2021a) On explainability of graph neural net-works via subgraph explorations. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR, pp 12,241–12,252 Yuan J, Yu H, Cao M, et al (2021b) Semi-supervised and self-supervised classi-fication with multi-view graph neural networks. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp 2466–2476 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 58 Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 

Yun S, Jeong M, Kim R, et al (2019) Graph transformer networks. Advances in neural information processing systems 32 Zeng H, Zhou H, Srivastava A, et al (2019) Graphsaint: Graph sampling based inductive learning method. In: International Conference on Learning Representations Zhang C, Gao J (2021) Hype-han: Hyperbolic hierarchical attention network for semantic embedding. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Conference on International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence, pp 3990–3996 Zhang J, Shi X, Xie J, et al (2018) Gaan: Gated attention networks for learning on large and spatiotemporal graphs. In: 34th Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 2018, UAI 2018 Zhang J, Zhang H, Xia C, et al (2020a) Graph-bert: Only attention is needed for learning graph representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:200105140 Zhang J, Gao M, Yu J, et al (2021a) Double-scale self-supervised hyper-graph learning for group recommendation. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, pp 2557–2567 Zhang J, Chen Y, Xiao X, et al (2022a) Learnable hypergraph laplacian for hypergraph learning. In: ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE, pp 4503–4507 Zhang J, Li F, Xiao X, et al (2022b) Hypergraph convolutional networks via equivalency between hypergraphs and undirected graphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:220316939 Zhang K, Zhu Y, Wang J, et al (2019) Adaptive structural fingerprints for graph attention networks. In: International Conference on Learning Representations Zhang R, Zou Y, Ma J (2020b) Hyper-sagnn: a self-attention based graph neural network for hypergraphs. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) Zhang S, Xie L (2020) Improving attention mechanism in graph neural net-works via cardinality preservation. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), NIH Public Access, p 1395 Zhang W, Chen Z, Dong C, et al (2021b) Graph-based tri-attention network for answer ranking in cqa. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 14,463–14,471 Springer Nature 2021 L ATEX template 

Attention-based Graph Neural Networks: A Survey 59 Zhang W, Yin Z, Sheng Z, et al (2022c) Graph attention multi-layer percep-tron. arXiv preprint arXiv:220604355 Zhang X, Zeman M, Tsiligkaridis T, et al (2021c) Graph-guided network for irregularly sampled multivariate time series. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) Zhang Y, Wang X, Shi C, et al (2021d) Hyperbolic graph attention network. IEEE Transactions on Big Data Zhang Z, Zhuang F, Zhu H, et al (2020c) Relational graph neural network with hierarchical attention for knowledge graph completion. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pp 9612–9619 Zhao H, Wang Y, Duan J, et al (2020) Multivariate time-series anomaly detec-tion via graph attention network. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), IEEE, pp 841–850 Zhao Z, Gao B, Zheng VW, et al (2017) Link prediction via ranking metric dual-level attention network learning. In: Proceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp 3525–3531 Zheng C, Fan X, Wang C, et al (2020) Gman: A graph multi-attention network for traffic prediction. In: Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence, pp 1234–1241 Zheng X, Liu Y, Pan S, et al (2022) Graph neural networks for graphs with heterophily: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:220207082 Zhou J, Cui G, Hu S, et al (2020) Graph neural networks: A review of methods and applications. AI Open 1:57–81 Zhou Y, Zheng H, Huang X, et al (2022) Graph neural networks: Taxon-omy, advances, and trends. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 13(1):1–54 Zhu Y, Lyu F, Hu C, et al (2022) Learnable encoder-decoder architecture for dynamic graph: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:220310480 Zuo Y, Liu G, Lin H, et al (2018) Embedding temporal network via neighbor-hood formation. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge discovery & data mining, pp 2857–2866